HAPTER II. THE 16TH AND 17TH OF JULY

I had arrived at Styles on the 5th of July. I come now to the events of
the 16th and 17th of that month. For the convenience of the reader I
will recapitulate the incidents of those days in as exact a manner as
possible. They were elicited subsequently at the trial by a process of
long and tedious cross-examinations.

I received a letter from Evelyn Howard a couple of days after her
departure, telling me she was working as a nurse at the big hospital in
Middlingham, a manufacturing town some fifteen miles away, and begging
me to let her know if Mrs. Inglethorp should show any wish to be
reconciled.

The only fly in the ointment of my peaceful days was Mrs. Cavendish’s
extraordinary, and, for my part, unaccountable preference for the
society of Dr. Bauerstein. What she saw in the man I cannot imagine,
but she was always asking him up to the house, and often went off for
long expeditions with him. I must confess that I was quite unable to
see his attraction.

The 16th of July fell on a Monday. It was a day of turmoil. The famous
bazaar had taken place on Saturday, and an entertainment, in connection
with the same charity, at which Mrs. Inglethorp was to recite a War
poem, was to be held that night. We were all busy during the morning
arranging and decorating the Hall in the village where it was to take
place. We had a late luncheon and spent the afternoon resting in the
garden. I noticed that John’s manner was somewhat unusual. He seemed
very excited and restless.

After tea, Mrs. Inglethorp went to lie down to rest before her efforts
in the evening and I challenged Mary Cavendish to a single at tennis.

About a quarter to seven, Mrs. Inglethorp called us that we should be
late as supper was early that night. We had rather a scramble to get
ready in time; and before the meal was over the motor was waiting at
the door.

The entertainment was a great success, Mrs. Inglethorp’s recitation
receiving tremendous applause. There were also some tableaux in which
Cynthia took part. She did not return with us, having been asked to a
supper party, and to remain the night with some friends who had been
acting with her in the tableaux.

The following morning, Mrs. Inglethorp stayed in bed to breakfast, as
she was rather overtired; but she appeared in her briskest mood about
12.30, and swept Lawrence and myself off to a luncheon party.

“Such a charming invitation from Mrs. Rolleston. Lady Tadminster’s
sister, you know. The Rollestons came over with the Conqueror—one of
our oldest families.”

Mary had excused herself on the plea of an engagement with Dr.
Bauerstein.

We had a pleasant luncheon, and as we drove away Lawrence suggested
that we should return by Tadminster, which was barely a mile out of our
way, and pay a visit to Cynthia in her dispensary. Mrs. Inglethorp
replied that this was an excellent idea, but as she had several letters
to write she would drop us there, and we could come back with Cynthia
in the pony-trap.

We were detained under suspicion by the hospital porter, until Cynthia
appeared to vouch for us, looking very cool and sweet in her long white
overall. She took us up to her sanctum, and introduced us to her fellow
dispenser, a rather awe-inspiring individual, whom Cynthia cheerily
addressed as “Nibs.”

“What a lot of bottles!” I exclaimed, as my eye travelled round the
small room. “Do you really know what’s in them all?”

“Say something original,” groaned Cynthia. “Every single person who
comes up here says that. We are really thinking of bestowing a prize on
the first individual who does _not_ say: ‘What a lot of bottles!’ And I
know the next thing you’re going to say is: ‘How many people have you
poisoned?’”

I pleaded guilty with a laugh.

“If you people only knew how fatally easy it is to poison someone by
mistake, you wouldn’t joke about it. Come on, let’s have tea. We’ve got
all sorts of secret stories in that cupboard. No, Lawrence—that’s the
poison cupboard. The big cupboard—that’s right.”

We had a very cheery tea, and assisted Cynthia to wash up afterwards.
We had just put away the last tea-spoon when a knock came at the door.
The countenances of Cynthia and Nibs were suddenly petrified into a
stern and forbidding expression.

“Come in,” said Cynthia, in a sharp professional tone.

A young and rather scared looking nurse appeared with a bottle which
she proffered to Nibs, who waved her towards Cynthia with the somewhat
enigmatical remark:

“_I_’m not really here to-day.”

Cynthia took the bottle and examined it with the severity of a judge.

“This should have been sent up this morning.”

“Sister is very sorry. She forgot.”

“Sister should read the rules outside the door.”

I gathered from the little nurse’s expression that there was not the
least likelihood of her having the hardihood to retail this message to
the dreaded “Sister”.

“So now it can’t be done until to-morrow,” finished Cynthia.

“Don’t you think you could possibly let us have it to-night?”

“Well,” said Cynthia graciously, “we are very busy, but if we have time
it shall be done.”

The little nurse withdrew, and Cynthia promptly took a jar from the
shelf, refilled the bottle, and placed it on the table outside the
door.

I laughed.

“Discipline must be maintained?”

“Exactly. Come out on our little balcony. You can see all the outside
wards there.”

I followed Cynthia and her friend and they pointed out the different
wards to me. Lawrence remained behind, but after a few moments Cynthia
called to him over her shoulder to come and join us. Then she looked at
her watch.

“Nothing more to do, Nibs?”

“No.”

“All right. Then we can lock up and go.”

I had seen Lawrence in quite a different light that afternoon. Compared
to John, he was an astoundingly difficult person to get to know. He was
the opposite of his brother in almost every respect, being unusually
shy and reserved. Yet he had a certain charm of manner, and I fancied
that, if one really knew him well, one could have a deep affection for
him. I had always fancied that his manner to Cynthia was rather
constrained, and that she on her side was inclined to be shy of him.
But they were both gay enough this afternoon, and chatted together like
a couple of children.

As we drove through the village, I remembered that I wanted some
stamps, so accordingly we pulled up at the post office.

As I came out again, I cannoned into a little man who was just
entering. I drew aside and apologised, when suddenly, with a loud
exclamation, he clasped me in his arms and kissed me warmly.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings!” he cried. “It is indeed _mon ami_ Hastings!”

“Poirot!” I exclaimed.

I turned to the pony-trap.

“This is a very pleasant meeting for me, Miss Cynthia. This is my old
friend, Monsieur Poirot, whom I have not seen for years.”

“Oh, we know Monsieur Poirot,” said Cynthia gaily. “But I had no idea
he was a friend of yours.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Poirot seriously. “I know Mademoiselle Cynthia. It
is by the charity of that good Mrs. Inglethorp that I am here.” Then,
as I looked at him inquiringly: “Yes, my friend, she had kindly
extended hospitality to seven of my countrypeople who, alas, are
refugees from their native land. We Belgians will always remember her
with gratitude.”

Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more than
five feet, four inches, but carried himself with great dignity. His
head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little
on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. The neatness of
his attire was almost incredible. I believe a speck of dust would have
caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandified
little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his
time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police. As a
detective, his _flair_ had been extraordinary, and he had achieved
triumphs by unravelling some of the most baffling cases of the day.

He pointed out to me the little house inhabited by him and his fellow
Belgians, and I promised to go and see him at an early date. Then he
raised his hat with a flourish to Cynthia, and we drove away.

“He’s a dear little man,” said Cynthia. “I’d no idea you knew him.”

“You’ve been entertaining a celebrity unawares,” I replied.

And, for the rest of the way home, I recited to them the various
exploits and triumphs of Hercule Poirot.

We arrived back in a very cheerful mood. As we entered the hall, Mrs.
Inglethorp came out of her boudoir. She looked flushed and upset.

“Oh, it’s you,” she said.

“Is there anything the matter, Aunt Emily?” asked Cynthia.

“Certainly not,” said Mrs. Inglethorp sharply. “What should there be?”
Then catching sight of Dorcas, the parlourmaid, going into the
dining-room, she called to her to bring some stamps into the boudoir.

“Yes, m’m.” The old servant hesitated, then added diffidently: “Don’t
you think, m’m, you’d better get to bed? You’re looking very tired.”

“Perhaps you’re right, Dorcas—yes—no—not now. I’ve some letters I must
finish by post-time. Have you lighted the fire in my room as I told
you?”

“Yes, m’m.”

“Then I’ll go to bed directly after supper.”

She went into the boudoir again, and Cynthia stared after her.

“Goodness gracious! I wonder what’s up?” she said to Lawrence.

He did not seem to have heard her, for without a word he turned on his
heel and went out of the house.

I suggested a quick game of tennis before supper and, Cynthia agreeing,
I ran upstairs to fetch my racquet.

Mrs. Cavendish was coming down the stairs. It may have been my fancy,
but she, too, was looking odd and disturbed.

“Had a good walk with Dr. Bauerstein?” I asked, trying to appear as
indifferent as I could.

“I didn’t go,” she replied abruptly. “Where is Mrs. Inglethorp?”

“In the boudoir.”

Her hand clenched itself on the banisters, then she seemed to nerve
herself for some encounter, and went rapidly past me down the stairs
across the hall to the boudoir, the door of which she shut behind her.

As I ran out to the tennis court a few moments later, I had to pass the
open boudoir window, and was unable to help overhearing the following
scrap of dialogue. Mary Cavendish was saying in the voice of a woman
desperately controlling herself:

“Then you won’t show it to me?”

To which Mrs. Inglethorp replied:

“My dear Mary, it has nothing to do with that matter.”

“Then show it to me.”

“I tell you it is not what you imagine. It does not concern you in the
least.”

To which Mary Cavendish replied, with a rising bitterness:

“Of course, I might have known you would shield him.”

Cynthia was waiting for me, and greeted me eagerly with:

“I say! There’s been the most awful row! I’ve got it all out of
Dorcas.”

“What kind of a row?”

“Between Aunt Emily and _him_. I do hope she’s found him out at last!”

“Was Dorcas there, then?”

“Of course not. She ‘happened to be near the door’. It was a real old
bust-up. I do wish I knew what it was all about.”

I thought of Mrs. Raikes’s gipsy face, and Evelyn Howard’s warnings,
but wisely decided to hold my peace, whilst Cynthia exhausted every
possible hypothesis, and cheerfully hoped, “Aunt Emily will send him
away, and will never speak to him again.”

I was anxious to get hold of John, but he was nowhere to be seen.
Evidently something very momentous had occurred that afternoon. I tried
to forget the few words I had overheard; but, do what I would, I could
not dismiss them altogether from my mind. What was Mary Cavendish’s
concern in the matter?

Mr. Inglethorp was in the drawing-room when I came down to supper. His
face was impassive as ever, and the strange unreality of the man struck
me afresh.

Mrs. Inglethorp came down last. She still looked agitated, and during
the meal there was a somewhat constrained silence. Inglethorp was
unusually quiet. As a rule, he surrounded his wife with little
attentions, placing a cushion at her back, and altogether playing the
part of the devoted husband. Immediately after supper, Mrs. Inglethorp
retired to her boudoir again.

“Send my coffee in here, Mary,” she called. “I’ve just five minutes to
catch the post.”

Cynthia and I went and sat by the open window in the drawing-room. Mary
Cavendish brought our coffee to us. She seemed excited.

“Do you young people want lights, or do you enjoy the twilight?” she
asked. “Will you take Mrs. Inglethorp her coffee, Cynthia? I will pour
it out.”

“Do not trouble, Mary,” said Inglethorp. “I will take it to Emily.” He
poured it out, and went out of the room carrying it carefully.

Lawrence followed him, and Mrs. Cavendish sat down by us.

We three sat for some time in silence. It was a glorious night, hot and
still. Mrs. Cavendish fanned herself gently with a palm leaf.

“It’s almost too hot,” she murmured. “We shall have a thunderstorm.”

Alas, that these harmonious moments can never endure! My paradise was
rudely shattered by the sound of a well known, and heartily disliked,
voice in the hall.

“Dr. Bauerstein!” exclaimed Cynthia. “What a funny time to come.”

I glanced jealously at Mary Cavendish, but she seemed quite
undisturbed, the delicate pallor of her cheeks did not vary.

In a few moments, Alfred Inglethorp had ushered the doctor in, the
latter laughing, and protesting that he was in no fit state for a
drawing-room. In truth, he presented a sorry spectacle, being literally
plastered with mud.

“What have you been doing, doctor?” cried Mrs. Cavendish.

“I must make my apologies,” said the doctor. “I did not really mean to
come in, but Mr. Inglethorp insisted.”

“Well, Bauerstein, you are in a plight,” said John, strolling in from
the hall. “Have some coffee, and tell us what you have been up to.”

“Thank you, I will.” He laughed rather ruefully, as he described how he
had discovered a very rare species of fern in an inaccessible place,
and in his efforts to obtain it had lost his footing, and slipped
ignominiously into a neighbouring pond.

“The sun soon dried me off,” he added, “but I’m afraid my appearance is
very disreputable.”

At this juncture, Mrs. Inglethorp called to Cynthia from the hall, and
the girl ran out.

“Just carry up my despatch-case, will you, dear? I’m going to bed.”

The door into the hall was a wide one. I had risen when Cynthia did,
John was close by me. There were therefore three witnesses who could
swear that Mrs. Inglethorp was carrying her coffee, as yet untasted, in
her hand.

My evening was utterly and entirely spoilt by the presence of Dr.
Bauerstein. It seemed to me the man would never go. He rose at last,
however, and I breathed a sigh of relief.

“I’ll walk down to the village with you,” said Mr. Inglethorp. “I must
see our agent over those estate accounts.” He turned to John. “No one
need sit up. I will take the latch-key.”






CHAPTER III. THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDY

To make this part of my story clear, I append the following plan of the
first floor of Styles. The servants’ rooms are reached through the door
B. They have no communication with the right wing, where the
Inglethorps’ rooms were situated.




       01



It seemed to be the middle of the night when I was awakened by Lawrence
Cavendish. He had a candle in his hand, and the agitation of his face
told me at once that something was seriously wrong.

“What’s the matter?” I asked, sitting up in bed, and trying to collect
my scattered thoughts.

“We are afraid my mother is very ill. She seems to be having some kind
of fit. Unfortunately she has locked herself in.”

“I’ll come at once.”

I sprang out of bed; and, pulling on a dressing-gown, followed Lawrence
along the passage and the gallery to the right wing of the house.

John Cavendish joined us, and one or two of the servants were standing
round in a state of awe-stricken excitement. Lawrence turned to his
brother.

“What do you think we had better do?”

Never, I thought, had his indecision of character been more apparent.

John rattled the handle of Mrs. Inglethorp’s door violently, but with
no effect. It was obviously locked or bolted on the inside. The whole
household was aroused by now. The most alarming sounds were audible
from the interior of the room. Clearly something must be done.

“Try going through Mr. Inglethorp’s room, sir,” cried Dorcas. “Oh, the
poor mistress!”

Suddenly I realized that Alfred Inglethorp was not with us—that he
alone had given no sign of his presence. John opened the door of his
room. It was pitch dark, but Lawrence was following with the candle,
and by its feeble light we saw that the bed had not been slept in, and
that there was no sign of the room having been occupied.

We went straight to the connecting door. That, too, was locked or
bolted on the inside. What was to be done?

“Oh, dear, sir,” cried Dorcas, wringing her hands, “what ever shall we
do?”

“We must try and break the door in, I suppose. It’ll be a tough job,
though. Here, let one of the maids go down and wake Baily and tell him
to go for Dr. Wilkins at once. Now then, we’ll have a try at the door.
Half a moment, though, isn’t there a door into Miss Cynthia’s rooms?”

“Yes, sir, but that’s always bolted. It’s never been undone.”

“Well, we might just see.”

He ran rapidly down the corridor to Cynthia’s room. Mary Cavendish was
there, shaking the girl—who must have been an unusually sound
sleeper—and trying to wake her.

In a moment or two he was back.

“No good. That’s bolted too. We must break in the door. I think this
one is a shade less solid than the one in the passage.”

We strained and heaved together. The framework of the door was solid,
and for a long time it resisted our efforts, but at last we felt it
give beneath our weight, and finally, with a resounding crash, it was
burst open.

We stumbled in together, Lawrence still holding his candle. Mrs.
Inglethorp was lying on the bed, her whole form agitated by violent
convulsions, in one of which she must have overturned the table beside
her. As we entered, however, her limbs relaxed, and she fell back upon
the pillows.

John strode across the room, and lit the gas. Turning to Annie, one of
the housemaids, he sent her downstairs to the dining-room for brandy.
Then he went across to his mother whilst I unbolted the door that gave
on the corridor.

I turned to Lawrence, to suggest that I had better leave them now that
there was no further need of my services, but the words were frozen on
my lips. Never have I seen such a ghastly look on any man’s face. He
was white as chalk, the candle he held in his shaking hand was
sputtering onto the carpet, and his eyes, petrified with terror, or
some such kindred emotion, stared fixedly over my head at a point on
the further wall. It was as though he had seen something that turned
him to stone. I instinctively followed the direction of his eyes, but I
could see nothing unusual. The still feebly flickering ashes in the
grate, and the row of prim ornaments on the mantelpiece, were surely
harmless enough.

The violence of Mrs. Inglethorp’s attack seemed to be passing. She was
able to speak in short gasps.

“Better now—very sudden—stupid of me—to lock myself in.”

A shadow fell on the bed and, looking up, I saw Mary Cavendish standing
near the door with her arm around Cynthia. She seemed to be supporting
the girl, who looked utterly dazed and unlike herself. Her face was
heavily flushed, and she yawned repeatedly.

“Poor Cynthia is quite frightened,” said Mrs. Cavendish in a low clear
voice. She herself, I noticed, was dressed in her white land smock.
Then it must be later than I thought. I saw that a faint streak of
daylight was showing through the curtains of the windows, and that the
clock on the mantelpiece pointed to close upon five o’clock.

A strangled cry from the bed startled me. A fresh access of pain seized
the unfortunate old lady. The convulsions were of a violence terrible
to behold. Everything was confusion. We thronged round her, powerless
to help or alleviate. A final convulsion lifted her from the bed, until
she appeared to rest upon her head and her heels, with her body arched
in an extraordinary manner. In vain Mary and John tried to administer
more brandy. The moments flew. Again the body arched itself in that
peculiar fashion.

At that moment, Dr. Bauerstein pushed his way authoritatively into the
room. For one instant he stopped dead, staring at the figure on the
bed, and, at the same instant, Mrs. Inglethorp cried out in a strangled
voice, her eyes fixed on the doctor:

“Alfred—Alfred——” Then she fell back motionless on the pillows.

With a stride, the doctor reached the bed, and seizing her arms worked
them energetically, applying what I knew to be artificial respiration.
He issued a few short sharp orders to the servants. An imperious wave
of his hand drove us all to the door. We watched him, fascinated,
though I think we all knew in our hearts that it was too late, and that
nothing could be done now. I could see by the expression on his face
that he himself had little hope.

Finally he abandoned his task, shaking his head gravely. At that
moment, we heard footsteps outside, and Dr. Wilkins, Mrs. Inglethorp’s
own doctor, a portly, fussy little man, came bustling in.

In a few words Dr. Bauerstein explained how he had happened to be
passing the lodge gates as the car came out, and had run up to the
house as fast as he could, whilst the car went on to fetch Dr. Wilkins.
With a faint gesture of the hand, he indicated the figure on the bed.

“Ve—ry sad. Ve—ry sad,” murmured Dr. Wilkins. “Poor dear lady. Always
did far too much—far too much—against my advice. I warned her. Her
heart was far from strong. ‘Take it easy,’ I said to her,
‘Take—it—easy’. But no—her zeal for good works was too great. Nature
rebelled. Na—ture—re—belled.”

Dr. Bauerstein, I noticed, was watching the local doctor narrowly. He
still kept his eyes fixed on him as he spoke.

“The convulsions were of a peculiar violence, Dr. Wilkins. I am sorry
you were not here in time to witness them. They were quite—tetanic in
character.”

“Ah!” said Dr. Wilkins wisely.

“I should like to speak to you in private,” said Dr. Bauerstein. He
turned to John. “You do not object?”

“Certainly not.”

We all trooped out into the corridor, leaving the two doctors alone,
and I heard the key turned in the lock behind us.

We went slowly down the stairs. I was violently excited. I have a
certain talent for deduction, and Dr. Bauerstein’s manner had started a
flock of wild surmises in my mind. Mary Cavendish laid her hand upon my
arm.

“What is it? Why did Dr. Bauerstein seem so—peculiar?”

I looked at her.

“Do you know what I think?”

“What?”

“Listen!” I looked round, the others were out of earshot. I lowered my
voice to a whisper. “I believe she has been poisoned! I’m certain Dr.
Bauerstein suspects it.”

“_What?_” She shrank against the wall, the pupils of her eyes dilating
wildly. Then, with a sudden cry that startled me, she cried out: “No,
no—not that—not that!” And breaking from me, fled up the stairs. I
followed her, afraid that she was going to faint. I found her leaning
against the bannisters, deadly pale. She waved me away impatiently.

“No, no—leave me. I’d rather be alone. Let me just be quiet for a
minute or two. Go down to the others.”

I obeyed her reluctantly. John and Lawrence were in the dining-room. I
joined them. We were all silent, but I suppose I voiced the thoughts of
us all when I at last broke it by saying:

“Where is Mr. Inglethorp?”

John shook his head.

“He’s not in the house.”

Our eyes met. Where _was_ Alfred Inglethorp? His absence was strange
and inexplicable. I remembered Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words. What lay
beneath them? What more could she have told us, if she had had time?

At last we heard the doctors descending the stairs. Dr. Wilkins was
looking important and excited, and trying to conceal an inward
exultation under a manner of decorous calm. Dr. Bauerstein remained in
the background, his grave bearded face unchanged. Dr. Wilkins was the
spokesman for the two. He addressed himself to John:

“Mr. Cavendish, I should like your consent to a post-mortem.”

“Is that necessary?” asked John gravely. A spasm of pain crossed his
face.

“Absolutely,” said Dr. Bauerstein.

“You mean by that——?”

“That neither Dr. Wilkins nor myself could give a death certificate
under the circumstances.”

John bent his head.

“In that case, I have no alternative but to agree.”

“Thank you,” said Dr. Wilkins briskly. “We propose that it should take
place to-morrow night—or rather to-night.” And he glanced at the
daylight. “Under the circumstances, I am afraid an inquest can hardly
be avoided—these formalities are necessary, but I beg that you won’t
distress yourselves.”

There was a pause, and then Dr. Bauerstein drew two keys from his
pocket, and handed them to John.

“These are the keys of the two rooms. I have locked them and, in my
opinion, they would be better kept locked for the present.”

The doctors then departed.

I had been turning over an idea in my head, and I felt that the moment
had now come to broach it. Yet I was a little chary of doing so. John,
I knew, had a horror of any kind of publicity, and was an easygoing
optimist, who preferred never to meet trouble half-way. It might be
difficult to convince him of the soundness of my plan. Lawrence, on the
other hand, being less conventional, and having more imagination, I
felt I might count upon as an ally. There was no doubt that the moment
had come for me to take the lead.

“John,” I said, “I am going to ask you something.”

“Well?”

“You remember my speaking of my friend Poirot? The Belgian who is here?
He has been a most famous detective.”

“Yes.”

“I want you to let me call him in—to investigate this matter.”

“What—now? Before the post-mortem?”

“Yes, time is an advantage if—if—there has been foul play.”

“Rubbish!” cried Lawrence angrily. “In my opinion the whole thing is a
mare’s nest of Bauerstein’s! Wilkins hadn’t an idea of such a thing,
until Bauerstein put it into his head. But, like all specialists,
Bauerstein’s got a bee in his bonnet. Poisons are his hobby, so of
course he sees them everywhere.”

I confess that I was surprised by Lawrence’s attitude. He was so seldom
vehement about anything.

John hesitated.

“I can’t feel as you do, Lawrence,” he said at last. “I’m inclined to
give Hastings a free hand, though I should prefer to wait a bit. We
don’t want any unnecessary scandal.”

“No, no,” I cried eagerly, “you need have no fear of that. Poirot is
discretion itself.”

“Very well, then, have it your own way. I leave it in your hands.
Though, if it is as we suspect, it seems a clear enough case. God
forgive me if I am wronging him!”

I looked at my watch. It was six o’clock. I determined to lose no time.

Five minutes’ delay, however, I allowed myself. I spent it in
ransacking the library until I discovered a medical book which gave a
description of strychnine poisoning.






CHAPTER IV. POIROT INVESTIGATES

The house which the Belgians occupied in the village was quite close to
the park gates. One could save time by taking a narrow path through the
long grass, which cut off the detours of the winding drive. So I,
accordingly, went that way. I had nearly reached the lodge, when my
attention was arrested by the running figure of a man approaching me.
It was Mr. Inglethorp. Where had he been? How did he intend to explain
his absence?

He accosted me eagerly.

“My God! This is terrible! My poor wife! I have only just heard.”

“Where have you been?” I asked.

“Denby kept me late last night. It was one o’clock before we’d
finished. Then I found that I’d forgotten the latch-key after all. I
didn’t want to arouse the household, so Denby gave me a bed.”

“How did you hear the news?” I asked.

“Wilkins knocked Denby up to tell him. My poor Emily! She was so
self-sacrificing—such a noble character. She over-taxed her strength.”

A wave of revulsion swept over me. What a consummate hypocrite the man
was!

“I must hurry on,” I said, thankful that he did not ask me whither I
was bound.

In a few minutes I was knocking at the door of Leastways Cottage.

Getting no answer, I repeated my summons impatiently. A window above me
was cautiously opened, and Poirot himself looked out.

He gave an exclamation of surprise at seeing me. In a few brief words,
I explained the tragedy that had occurred, and that I wanted his help.

“Wait, my friend, I will let you in, and you shall recount to me the
affair whilst I dress.”

In a few moments he had unbarred the door, and I followed him up to his
room. There he installed me in a chair, and I related the whole story,
keeping back nothing, and omitting no circumstance, however
insignificant, whilst he himself made a careful and deliberate toilet.

I told him of my awakening, of Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words, of her
husband’s absence, of the quarrel the day before, of the scrap of
conversation between Mary and her mother-in-law that I had overheard,
of the former quarrel between Mrs. Inglethorp and Evelyn Howard, and of
the latter’s innuendoes.

I was hardly as clear as I could wish. I repeated myself several times,
and occasionally had to go back to some detail that I had forgotten.
Poirot smiled kindly on me.

“The mind is confused? Is it not so? Take time, _mon ami_. You are
agitated; you are excited—it is but natural. Presently, when we are
calmer, we will arrange the facts, neatly, each in his proper place. We
will examine—and reject. Those of importance we will put on one side;
those of no importance, pouf!”—he screwed up his cherub-like face, and
puffed comically enough—“blow them away!”

“That’s all very well,” I objected, “but how are you going to decide
what is important, and what isn’t? That always seems the difficulty to
me.”

Poirot shook his head energetically. He was now arranging his moustache
with exquisite care.

“Not so. _Voyons!_ One fact leads to another—so we continue. Does the
next fit in with that? _A merveille!_ Good! We can proceed. This next
little fact—no! Ah, that is curious! There is something missing—a link
in the chain that is not there. We examine. We search. And that little
curious fact, that possibly paltry little detail that will not tally,
we put it here!” He made an extravagant gesture with his hand. “It is
significant! It is tremendous!”

“Y—es——”

“Ah!” Poirot shook his forefinger so fiercely at me that I quailed
before it. “Beware! Peril to the detective who says: ‘It is so small—it
does not matter. It will not agree. I will forget it.’ That way lies
confusion! Everything matters.”

“I know. You always told me that. That’s why I have gone into all the
details of this thing whether they seemed to me relevant or not.”

“And I am pleased with you. You have a good memory, and you have given
me the facts faithfully. Of the order in which you present them, I say
nothing—truly, it is deplorable! But I make allowances—you are upset.
To that I attribute the circumstance that you have omitted one fact of
paramount importance.”

“What is that?” I asked.

“You have not told me if Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night.”

I stared at him. Surely the war had affected the little man’s brain. He
was carefully engaged in brushing his coat before putting it on, and
seemed wholly engrossed in the task.

“I don’t remember,” I said. “And, anyway, I don’t see——”

“You do not see? But it is of the first importance.”

“I can’t see why,” I said, rather nettled. “As far as I can remember,
she didn’t eat much. She was obviously upset, and it had taken her
appetite away. That was only natural.”

“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “it was only natural.”

He opened a drawer, and took out a small despatch-case, then turned to
me.

“Now I am ready. We will proceed to the château, and study matters on
the spot. Excuse me, _mon ami_, you dressed in haste, and your tie is
on one side. Permit me.” With a deft gesture, he rearranged it.

“_Ça y est!_ Now, shall we start?”

We hurried up the village, and turned in at the lodge gates. Poirot
stopped for a moment, and gazed sorrowfully over the beautiful expanse
of park, still glittering with morning dew.

“So beautiful, so beautiful, and yet, the poor family, plunged in
sorrow, prostrated with grief.”

He looked at me keenly as he spoke, and I was aware that I reddened
under his prolonged gaze.

Was the family prostrated by grief? Was the sorrow at Mrs. Inglethorp’s
death so great? I realized that there was an emotional lack in the
atmosphere. The dead woman had not the gift of commanding love. Her
death was a shock and a distress, but she would not be passionately
regretted.

Poirot seemed to follow my thoughts. He nodded his head gravely.

“No, you are right,” he said, “it is not as though there was a blood
tie. She has been kind and generous to these Cavendishes, but she was
not their own mother. Blood tells—always remember that—blood tells.”

“Poirot,” I said, “I wish you would tell me why you wanted to know if
Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night? I have been turning it over in my
mind, but I can’t see how it has anything to do with the matter?”

He was silent for a minute or two as we walked along, but finally he
said:

“I do not mind telling you—though, as you know, it is not my habit to
explain until the end is reached. The present contention is that Mrs.
Inglethorp died of strychnine poisoning, presumably administered in her
coffee.”

“Yes?”

“Well, what time was the coffee served?”

“About eight o’clock.”

“Therefore she drank it between then and half-past eight—certainly not
much later. Well, strychnine is a fairly rapid poison. Its effects
would be felt very soon, probably in about an hour. Yet, in Mrs.
Inglethorp’s case, the symptoms do not manifest themselves until five
o’clock the next morning: nine hours! But a heavy meal, taken at about
the same time as the poison, might retard its effects, though hardly to
that extent. Still, it is a possibility to be taken into account. But,
according to you, she ate very little for supper, and yet the symptoms
do not develop until early the next morning! Now that is a curious
circumstance, my friend. Something may arise at the autopsy to explain
it. In the meantime, remember it.”

As we neared the house, John came out and met us. His face looked weary
and haggard.

“This is a very dreadful business, Monsieur Poirot,” he said. “Hastings
has explained to you that we are anxious for no publicity?”

“I comprehend perfectly.”

“You see, it is only suspicion so far. We have nothing to go upon.”

“Precisely. It is a matter of precaution only.”

John turned to me, taking out his cigarette-case, and lighting a
cigarette as he did so.

“You know that fellow Inglethorp is back?”

“Yes. I met him.”

John flung the match into an adjacent flower bed, a proceeding which
was too much for Poirot’s feelings. He retrieved it, and buried it
neatly.

“It’s jolly difficult to know how to treat him.”

“That difficulty will not exist long,” pronounced Poirot quietly.

John looked puzzled, not quite understanding the portent of this
cryptic saying. He handed the two keys which Dr. Bauerstein had given
him to me.

“Show Monsieur Poirot everything he wants to see.”

“The rooms are locked?” asked Poirot.

“Dr. Bauerstein considered it advisable.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“Then he is very sure. Well, that simplifies matters for us.”

We went up together to the room of the tragedy. For convenience I
append a plan of the room and the principal articles of furniture in
it.




       02



Poirot locked the door on the inside, and proceeded to a minute
inspection of the room. He darted from one object to the other with the
agility of a grasshopper. I remained by the door, fearing to obliterate
any clues. Poirot, however, did not seem grateful to me for my
forbearance.

“What have you, my friend,” he cried, “that you remain there like—how
do you say it?—ah, yes, the stuck pig?”

I explained that I was afraid of obliterating any foot-marks.

“Foot-marks? But what an idea! There has already been practically an
army in the room! What foot-marks are we likely to find? No, come here
and aid me in my search. I will put down my little case until I need
it.”

He did so, on the round table by the window, but it was an ill-advised
proceeding; for, the top of it being loose, it tilted up, and
precipitated the despatch-case on the floor.

“_Eh voilà une table!_” cried Poirot. “Ah, my friend, one may live in a
big house and yet have no comfort.”

After which piece of moralizing, he resumed his search.

A small purple despatch-case, with a key in the lock, on the
writing-table, engaged his attention for some time. He took out the key
from the lock, and passed it to me to inspect. I saw nothing peculiar,
however. It was an ordinary key of the Yale type, with a bit of twisted
wire through the handle.

Next, he examined the framework of the door we had broken in, assuring
himself that the bolt had really been shot. Then he went to the door
opposite leading into Cynthia’s room. That door was also bolted, as I
had stated. However, he went to the length of unbolting it, and opening
and shutting it several times; this he did with the utmost precaution
against making any noise. Suddenly something in the bolt itself seemed
to rivet his attention. He examined it carefully, and then, nimbly
whipping out a pair of small forceps from his case, he drew out some
minute particle which he carefully sealed up in a tiny envelope.

On the chest of drawers there was a tray with a spirit lamp and a small
saucepan on it. A small quantity of a dark fluid remained in the
saucepan, and an empty cup and saucer that had been drunk out of stood
near it.

I wondered how I could have been so unobservant as to overlook this.
Here was a clue worth having. Poirot delicately dipped his finger into
liquid, and tasted it gingerly. He made a grimace.

“Cocoa—with—I think—rum in it.”

He passed on to the debris on the floor, where the table by the bed had
been overturned. A reading-lamp, some books, matches, a bunch of keys,
and the crushed fragments of a coffee-cup lay scattered about.

“Ah, this is curious,” said Poirot.

“I must confess that I see nothing particularly curious about it.”

“You do not? Observe the lamp—the chimney is broken in two places; they
lie there as they fell. But see, the coffee-cup is absolutely smashed
to powder.”

“Well,” I said wearily, “I suppose someone must have stepped on it.”

“Exactly,” said Poirot, in an odd voice. “Someone stepped on it.”

He rose from his knees, and walked slowly across to the mantelpiece,
where he stood abstractedly fingering the ornaments, and straightening
them—a trick of his when he was agitated.

“_Mon ami_,” he said, turning to me, “somebody stepped on that cup,
grinding it to powder, and the reason they did so was either because it
contained strychnine or—which is far more serious—because it did not
contain strychnine!”

I made no reply. I was bewildered, but I knew that it was no good
asking him to explain. In a moment or two he roused himself, and went
on with his investigations. He picked up the bunch of keys from the
floor, and twirling them round in his fingers finally selected one,
very bright and shining, which he tried in the lock of the purple
despatch-case. It fitted, and he opened the box, but after a moment’s
hesitation, closed and relocked it, and slipped the bunch of keys, as
well as the key that had originally stood in the lock, into his own
pocket.

“I have no authority to go through these papers. But it should be
done—at once!”

He then made a very careful examination of the drawers of the
wash-stand. Crossing the room to the left-hand window, a round stain,
hardly visible on the dark brown carpet, seemed to interest him
particularly. He went down on his knees, examining it minutely—even
going so far as to smell it.

Finally, he poured a few drops of the cocoa into a test tube, sealing
it up carefully. His next proceeding was to take out a little notebook.

“We have found in this room,” he said, writing busily, “six points of
interest. Shall I enumerate them, or will you?”

“Oh, you,” I replied hastily.

“Very well, then. One, a coffee-cup that has been ground into powder;
two, a despatch-case with a key in the lock; three, a stain on the
floor.”

“That may have been done some time ago,” I interrupted.

“No, for it is still perceptibly damp and smells of coffee. Four, a
fragment of some dark green fabric—only a thread or two, but
recognizable.”

“Ah!” I cried. “That was what you sealed up in the envelope.”

“Yes. It may turn out to be a piece of one of Mrs. Inglethorp’s own
dresses, and quite unimportant. We shall see. Five, _this_!” With a
dramatic gesture, he pointed to a large splash of candle grease on the
floor by the writing-table. “It must have been done since yesterday,
otherwise a good housemaid would have at once removed it with
blotting-paper and a hot iron. One of my best hats once—but that is not
to the point.”

“It was very likely done last night. We were very agitated. Or perhaps
Mrs. Inglethorp herself dropped her candle.”

“You brought only one candle into the room?”

“Yes. Lawrence Cavendish was carrying it. But he was very upset. He
seemed to see something over here”—I indicated the mantelpiece—“that
absolutely paralysed him.”

“That is interesting,” said Poirot quickly. “Yes, it is suggestive”—his
eye sweeping the whole length of the wall—“but it was not his candle
that made this great patch, for you perceive that this is white grease;
whereas Monsieur Lawrence’s candle, which is still on the
dressing-table, is pink. On the other hand, Mrs. Inglethorp had no
candlestick in the room, only a reading-lamp.”

“Then,” I said, “what do you deduce?”

To which my friend only made a rather irritating reply, urging me to
use my own natural faculties.

“And the sixth point?” I asked. “I suppose it is the sample of cocoa.”

“No,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “I might have included that in the six,
but I did not. No, the sixth point I will keep to myself for the
present.”

He looked quickly round the room. “There is nothing more to be done
here, I think, unless”—he stared earnestly and long at the dead ashes
in the grate. “The fire burns—and it destroys. But by chance—there
might be—let us see!”

Deftly, on hands and knees, he began to sort the ashes from the grate
into the fender, handling them with the greatest caution. Suddenly, he
gave a faint exclamation.

“The forceps, Hastings!”

I quickly handed them to him, and with skill he extracted a small piece
of half charred paper.

“There, _mon ami!_” he cried. “What do you think of that?”

I scrutinized the fragment. This is an exact reproduction of it:—




       03


I was puzzled. It was unusually thick, quite unlike ordinary notepaper.
Suddenly an idea struck me.

“Poirot!” I cried. “This is a fragment of a will!”

“Exactly.”

I looked up at him sharply.

“You are not surprised?”

“No,” he said gravely, “I expected it.”

I relinquished the piece of paper, and watched him put it away in his
case, with the same methodical care that he bestowed on everything. My
brain was in a whirl. What was this complication of a will? Who had
destroyed it? The person who had left the candle grease on the floor?
Obviously. But how had anyone gained admission? All the doors had been
bolted on the inside.

“Now, my friend,” said Poirot briskly, “we will go. I should like to
ask a few questions of the parlourmaid—Dorcas, her name is, is it not?”

We passed through Alfred Inglethorp’s room, and Poirot delayed long
enough to make a brief but fairly comprehensive examination of it. We
went out through that door, locking both it and that of Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room as before.

I took him down to the boudoir which he had expressed a wish to see,
and went myself in search of Dorcas.

When I returned with her, however, the boudoir was empty.

“Poirot,” I cried, “where are you?”

“I am here, my friend.”

He had stepped outside the French window, and was standing, apparently
lost in admiration, before the various shaped flower beds.

“Admirable!” he murmured. “Admirable! What symmetry! Observe that
crescent; and those diamonds—their neatness rejoices the eye. The
spacing of the plants, also, is perfect. It has been recently done; is
it not so?”

“Yes, I believe they were at it yesterday afternoon. But come in—Dorcas
is here.”

“_Eh bien, eh bien!_ Do not grudge me a moment’s satisfaction of the
eye.”

“Yes, but this affair is more important.”

“And how do you know that these fine begonias are not of equal
importance?”

I shrugged my shoulders. There was really no arguing with him if he
chose to take that line.

“You do not agree? But such things have been. Well, we will come in and
interview the brave Dorcas.”

Dorcas was standing in the boudoir, her hands folded in front of her,
and her grey hair rose in stiff waves under her white cap. She was the
very model and picture of a good old-fashioned servant.

In her attitude towards Poirot, she was inclined to be suspicious, but
he soon broke down her defences. He drew forward a chair.

“Pray be seated, mademoiselle.”

“Thank you, sir.”

“You have been with your mistress many years, is it not so?”

“Ten years, sir.”

“That is a long time, and very faithful service. You were much attached
to her, were you not?”

“She was a very good mistress to me, sir.”

“Then you will not object to answering a few questions. I put them to
you with Mr. Cavendish’s full approval.”

“Oh, certainly, sir.”

“Then I will begin by asking you about the events of yesterday
afternoon. Your mistress had a quarrel?”

“Yes, sir. But I don’t know that I ought——” Dorcas hesitated.

Poirot looked at her keenly.

“My good Dorcas, it is necessary that I should know every detail of
that quarrel as fully as possible. Do not think that you are betraying
your mistress’s secrets. Your mistress lies dead, and it is necessary
that we should know all—if we are to avenge her. Nothing can bring her
back to life, but we do hope, if there has been foul play, to bring the
murderer to justice.”

“Amen to that,” said Dorcas fiercely. “And, naming no names, there’s
_one_ in this house that none of us could ever abide! And an ill day it
was when first _he_ darkened the threshold.”

Poirot waited for her indignation to subside, and then, resuming his
business-like tone, he asked:

“Now, as to this quarrel? What is the first you heard of it?”

“Well, sir, I happened to be going along the hall outside yesterday——”

“What time was that?”

“I couldn’t say exactly, sir, but it wasn’t tea-time by a long way.
Perhaps four o’clock—or it may have been a bit later. Well, sir, as I
said, I happened to be passing along, when I heard voices very loud and
angry in here. I didn’t exactly mean to listen, but—well, there it is.
I stopped. The door was shut, but the mistress was speaking very sharp
and clear, and I heard what she said quite plainly. ‘You have lied to
me, and deceived me,’ she said. I didn’t hear what Mr. Inglethorp
replied. He spoke a good bit lower than she did—but she answered: ‘How
dare you? I have kept you and clothed you and fed you! You owe
everything to me! And this is how you repay me! By bringing disgrace
upon our name!’ Again I didn’t hear what he said, but she went on:
‘Nothing that you can say will make any difference. I see my duty
clearly. My mind is made up. You need not think that any fear of
publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.’ Then I
thought I heard them coming out, so I went off quickly.”

“You are sure it was Mr. Inglethorp’s voice you heard?”

“Oh, yes, sir, whose else’s could it be?”

“Well, what happened next?”

“Later, I came back to the hall; but it was all quiet. At five o’clock,
Mrs. Inglethorp rang the bell and told me to bring her a cup of
tea—nothing to eat—to the boudoir. She was looking dreadful—so white
and upset. ‘Dorcas,’ she says, ‘I’ve had a great shock.’ ‘I’m sorry for
that, m’m,’ I says. ‘You’ll feel better after a nice hot cup of tea,
m’m.’ She had something in her hand. I don’t know if it was a letter,
or just a piece of paper, but it had writing on it, and she kept
staring at it, almost as if she couldn’t believe what was written
there. She whispered to herself, as though she had forgotten I was
there: ‘These few words—and everything’s changed.’ And then she says to
me: ‘Never trust a man, Dorcas, they’re not worth it!’ I hurried off,
and got her a good strong cup of tea, and she thanked me, and said
she’d feel better when she’d drunk it. ‘I don’t know what to do,’ she
says. ‘Scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing, Dorcas.
I’d rather hush it up if I could.’ Mrs. Cavendish came in just then, so
she didn’t say any more.”

“She still had the letter, or whatever it was, in her hand?”



“Yes, sir.”

“What would she be likely to do with it afterwards?”

“Well, I don’t know, sir, I expect she would lock it up in that purple
case of hers.”

“Is that where she usually kept important papers?”

“Yes, sir. She brought it down with her every morning, and took it up
every night.”

“When did she lose the key of it?”

“She missed it yesterday at lunch-time, sir, and told me to look
carefully for it. She was very much put out about it.”

“But she had a duplicate key?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

Dorcas was looking very curiously at him and, to tell the truth, so was
I. What was all this about a lost key? Poirot smiled.

“Never mind, Dorcas, it is my business to know things. Is this the key
that was lost?” He drew from his pocket the key that he had found in
the lock of the despatch-case upstairs.

Dorcas’s eyes looked as though they would pop out of her head.

“That’s it, sir, right enough. But where did you find it? I looked
everywhere for it.”

“Ah, but you see it was not in the same place yesterday as it was
to-day. Now, to pass to another subject, had your mistress a dark green
dress in her wardrobe?”

Dorcas was rather startled by the unexpected question.

“No, sir.”

“Are you quite sure?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

“Has anyone else in the house got a green dress?”

Dorcas reflected.

“Miss Cynthia has a green evening dress.”

“Light or dark green?”

“A light green, sir; a sort of chiffon, they call it.”

“Ah, that is not what I want. And nobody else has anything green?”

“No, sir—not that I know of.”

Poirot’s face did not betray a trace of whether he was disappointed or
otherwise. He merely remarked:

“Good, we will leave that and pass on. Have you any reason to believe
that your mistress was likely to take a sleeping powder last night?”

“Not _last_ night, sir, I know she didn’t.”

“Why do you know so positively?”

“Because the box was empty. She took the last one two days ago, and she
didn’t have any more made up.”

“You are quite sure of that?”

“Positive, sir.”

“Then that is cleared up! By the way, your mistress didn’t ask you to
sign any paper yesterday?”

“To sign a paper? No, sir.”

“When Mr. Hastings and Mr. Lawrence came in yesterday evening, they
found your mistress busy writing letters. I suppose you can give me no
idea to whom these letters were addressed?”

“I’m afraid I couldn’t, sir. I was out in the evening. Perhaps Annie
could tell you, though she’s a careless girl. Never cleared the
coffee-cups away last night. That’s what happens when I’m not here to
look after things.”

Poirot lifted his hand.

“Since they have been left, Dorcas, leave them a little longer, I pray
you. I should like to examine them.”

“Very well, sir.”

“What time did you go out last evening?”

“About six o’clock, sir.”

“Thank you, Dorcas, that is all I have to ask you.” He rose and
strolled to the window. “I have been admiring these flower beds. How
many gardeners are employed here, by the way?”

“Only three now, sir. Five, we had, before the war, when it was kept as
a gentleman’s place should be. I wish you could have seen it then, sir.
A fair sight it was. But now there’s only old Manning, and young
William, and a new-fashioned woman gardener in breeches and such-like.
Ah, these are dreadful times!”

“The good times will come again, Dorcas. At least, we hope so. Now,
will you send Annie to me here?”

“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”

“How did you know that Mrs. Inglethorp took sleeping powders?” I asked,
in lively curiosity, as Dorcas left the room. “And about the lost key
and the duplicate?”

“One thing at a time. As to the sleeping powders, I knew by this.” He
suddenly produced a small cardboard box, such as chemists use for
powders.

“Where did you find it?”

“In the wash-stand drawer in Mrs. Inglethorp’s bedroom. It was Number
Six of my catalogue.”

“But I suppose, as the last powder was taken two days ago, it is not of
much importance?”

“Probably not, but do you notice anything that strikes you as peculiar
about this box?”

I examined it closely.

“No, I can’t say that I do.”

“Look at the label.”

I read the label carefully: “‘One powder to be taken at bedtime, if
required. Mrs. Inglethorp.’ No, I see nothing unusual.”

“Not the fact that there is no chemist’s name?”

“Ah!” I exclaimed. “To be sure, that is odd!”

“Have you ever known a chemist to send out a box like that, without his
printed name?”

“No, I can’t say that I have.”

I was becoming quite excited, but Poirot damped my ardour by remarking:

“Yet the explanation is quite simple. So do not intrigue yourself, my
friend.”

An audible creaking proclaimed the approach of Annie, so I had no time
to reply.

Annie was a fine, strapping girl, and was evidently labouring under
intense excitement, mingled with a certain ghoulish enjoyment of the
tragedy.

Poirot came to the point at once, with a business-like briskness.

“I sent for you, Annie, because I thought you might be able to tell me
something about the letters Mrs. Inglethorp wrote last night. How many
were there? And can you tell me any of the names and addresses?”

Annie considered.

“There were four letters, sir. One was to Miss Howard, and one was to
Mr. Wells, the lawyer, and the other two I don’t think I remember,
sir—oh, yes, one was to Ross’s, the caterers in Tadminster. The other
one, I don’t remember.”

“Think,” urged Poirot.

Annie racked her brains in vain.

“I’m sorry, sir, but it’s clean gone. I don’t think I can have noticed
it.”

“It does not matter,” said Poirot, not betraying any sign of
disappointment. “Now I want to ask you about something else. There is a
saucepan in Mrs. Inglethorp’s room with some cocoa in it. Did she have
that every night?”

“Yes, sir, it was put in her room every evening, and she warmed it up
in the night—whenever she fancied it.”

“What was it? Plain cocoa?”

“Yes, sir, made with milk, with a teaspoonful of sugar, and two
teaspoonfuls of rum in it.”

“Who took it to her room?”

“I did, sir.”

“Always?”

“Yes, sir.”

“At what time?”

“When I went to draw the curtains, as a rule, sir.”

“Did you bring it straight up from the kitchen then?”

“No, sir, you see there’s not much room on the gas stove, so cook used
to make it early, before putting the vegetables on for supper. Then I
used to bring it up, and put it on the table by the swing door, and
take it into her room later.”

“The swing door is in the left wing, is it not?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And the table, is it on this side of the door, or on the
farther—servants’ side?”

“It’s this side, sir.”

“What time did you bring it up last night?”

“About quarter-past seven, I should say, sir.”

“And when did you take it into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room?”

“When I went to shut up, sir. About eight o’clock. Mrs. Inglethorp came
up to bed before I’d finished.”

“Then, between seven-fifteen and eight o’clock, the cocoa was standing
on the table in the left wing?”

“Yes, sir.” Annie had been growing redder and redder in the face, and
now she blurted out unexpectedly:

“And if there _was_ salt in it, sir, it wasn’t me. I never took the
salt near it.”

“What makes you think there was salt in it?” asked Poirot.

“Seeing it on the tray, sir.”

“You saw some salt on the tray?”

“Yes. Coarse kitchen salt, it looked. I never noticed it when I took
the tray up, but when I came to take it into the mistress’s room I saw
it at once, and I suppose I ought to have taken it down again, and
asked cook to make some fresh. But I was in a hurry, because Dorcas was
out, and I thought maybe the cocoa itself was all right, and the salt
had only gone on the tray. So I dusted it off with my apron, and took
it in.”

I had the utmost difficulty in controlling my excitement. Unknown to
herself, Annie had provided us with an important piece of evidence. How
she would have gaped if she had realized that her “coarse kitchen salt”
was strychnine, one of the most deadly poisons known to mankind. I
marvelled at Poirot’s calm. His self-control was astonishing. I awaited
his next question with impatience, but it disappointed me.

“When you went into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room, was the door leading into
Miss Cynthia’s room bolted?”

“Oh! Yes, sir; it always was. It had never been opened.”

“And the door into Mr. Inglethorp’s room? Did you notice if that was
bolted too?”

Annie hesitated.

“I couldn’t rightly say, sir; it was shut but I couldn’t say whether it
was bolted or not.”

“When you finally left the room, did Mrs. Inglethorp bolt the door
after you?”

“No, sir, not then, but I expect she did later. She usually did lock it
at night. The door into the passage, that is.”

“Did you notice any candle grease on the floor when you did the room
yesterday?”

“Candle grease? Oh, no, sir. Mrs. Inglethorp didn’t have a candle, only
a reading-lamp.”

“Then, if there had been a large patch of candle grease on the floor,
you think you would have been sure to have seen it?”

“Yes, sir, and I would have taken it out with a piece of blotting-paper
and a hot iron.”

Then Poirot repeated the question he had put to Dorcas:

“Did your mistress ever have a green dress?”

“No, sir.”

“Nor a mantle, nor a cape, nor a—how do you call it?—a sports coat?”

“Not green, sir.”

“Nor anyone else in the house?”

Annie reflected.

“No, sir.”

“You are sure of that?”

“Quite sure.”

“_Bien!_ That is all I want to know. Thank you very much.”

With a nervous giggle, Annie took herself creakingly out of the room.
My pent-up excitement burst forth.

“Poirot,” I cried, “I congratulate you! This is a great discovery.”

“What is a great discovery?”

“Why, that it was the cocoa and not the coffee that was poisoned. That
explains everything! Of course it did not take effect until the early
morning, since the cocoa was only drunk in the middle of the night.”

“So you think that the cocoa—mark well what I say, Hastings, the
_cocoa_—contained strychnine?”

“Of course! That salt on the tray, what else could it have been?”

“It might have been salt,” replied Poirot placidly.

I shrugged my shoulders. If he was going to take the matter that way,
it was no good arguing with him. The idea crossed my mind, not for the
first time, that poor old Poirot was growing old. Privately I thought
it lucky that he had associated with him someone of a more receptive
type of mind.

Poirot was surveying me with quietly twinkling eyes.

“You are not pleased with me, _mon ami?_”

“My dear Poirot,” I said coldly, “it is not for me to dictate to you.
You have a right to your own opinion, just as I have to mine.”

“A most admirable sentiment,” remarked Poirot, rising briskly to his
feet. “Now I have finished with this room. By the way, whose is the
smaller desk in the corner?”

“Mr. Inglethorp’s.”

“Ah!” He tried the roll top tentatively. “Locked. But perhaps one of
Mrs. Inglethorp’s keys would open it.” He tried several, twisting and
turning them with a practiced hand, and finally uttering an ejaculation
of satisfaction. “_Voilà!_ It is not the key, but it will open it at a
pinch.” He slid back the roll top, and ran a rapid eye over the neatly
filed papers. To my surprise, he did not examine them, merely remarking
approvingly as he relocked the desk: “Decidedly, he is a man of method,
this Mr. Inglethorp!”

A “man of method” was, in Poirot’s estimation, the highest praise that
could be bestowed on any individual.

I felt that my friend was not what he had been as he rambled on
disconnectedly:

“There were no stamps in his desk, but there might have been, eh, _mon
ami?_ There might have been? Yes”—his eyes wandered round the
room—“this boudoir has nothing more to tell us. It did not yield much.
Only this.”

He pulled a crumpled envelope out of his pocket, and tossed it over to
me. It was rather a curious document. A plain, dirty looking old
envelope with a few words scrawled across it, apparently at random. The
following is a facsimile of it.




       04








CHAPTER V. “IT ISN’T STRYCHNINE, IS IT?”

“Where did you find this?” I asked Poirot, in lively curiosity.

“In the waste-paper basket. You recognise the handwriting?”

“Yes, it is Mrs. Inglethorp’s. But what does it mean?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“I cannot say—but it is suggestive.”

A wild idea flashed across me. Was it possible that Mrs. Inglethorp’s
mind was deranged? Had she some fantastic idea of demoniacal
possession? And, if that were so, was it not also possible that she
might have taken her own life?

I was about to expound these theories to Poirot, when his own words
distracted me.

“Come,” he said, “now to examine the coffee-cups!”

“My dear Poirot! What on earth is the good of that, now that we know
about the cocoa?”

“Oh, _là là!_ That miserable cocoa!” cried Poirot flippantly.

He laughed with apparent enjoyment, raising his arms to heaven in mock
despair, in what I could not but consider the worst possible taste.

“And, anyway,” I said, with increasing coldness, “as Mrs. Inglethorp
took her coffee upstairs with her, I do not see what you expect to
find, unless you consider it likely that we shall discover a packet of
strychnine on the coffee tray!”

Poirot was sobered at once.

“Come, come, my friend,” he said, slipping his arms through mine. “_Ne
vous fâchez pas!_ Allow me to interest myself in my coffee-cups, and I
will respect your cocoa. There! Is it a bargain?”

He was so quaintly humorous that I was forced to laugh; and we went
together to the drawing-room, where the coffee-cups and tray remained
undisturbed as we had left them.

Poirot made me recapitulate the scene of the night before, listening
very carefully, and verifying the position of the various cups.

“So Mrs. Cavendish stood by the tray—and poured out. Yes. Then she came
across to the window where you sat with Mademoiselle Cynthia. Yes. Here
are the three cups. And the cup on the mantelpiece, half drunk, that
would be Mr. Lawrence Cavendish’s. And the one on the tray?”

“John Cavendish’s. I saw him put it down there.”

“Good. One, two, three, four, five—but where, then, is the cup of Mr.
Inglethorp?”

“He does not take coffee.”

“Then all are accounted for. One moment, my friend.”

With infinite care, he took a drop or two from the grounds in each cup,
sealing them up in separate test tubes, tasting each in turn as he did
so. His physiognomy underwent a curious change. An expression gathered
there that I can only describe as half puzzled, and half relieved.

“_Bien!_” he said at last. “It is evident! I had an idea—but clearly I
was mistaken. Yes, altogether I was mistaken. Yet it is strange. But no
matter!”

And, with a characteristic shrug, he dismissed whatever it was that was
worrying him from his mind. I could have told him from the beginning
that this obsession of his over the coffee was bound to end in a blind
alley, but I restrained my tongue. After all, though he was old, Poirot
had been a great man in his day.

“Breakfast is ready,” said John Cavendish, coming in from the hall.
“You will breakfast with us, Monsieur Poirot?”

Poirot acquiesced. I observed John. Already he was almost restored to
his normal self. The shock of the events of the last night had upset
him temporarily, but his equable poise soon swung back to the normal.
He was a man of very little imagination, in sharp contrast with his
brother, who had, perhaps, too much.

Ever since the early hours of the morning, John had been hard at work,
sending telegrams—one of the first had gone to Evelyn Howard—writing
notices for the papers, and generally occupying himself with the
melancholy duties that a death entails.

“May I ask how things are proceeding?” he said. “Do your investigations
point to my mother having died a natural death—or—or must we prepare
ourselves for the worst?”

“I think, Mr. Cavendish,” said Poirot gravely, “that you would do well
not to buoy yourself up with any false hopes. Can you tell me the views
of the other members of the family?”

“My brother Lawrence is convinced that we are making a fuss over
nothing. He says that everything points to its being a simple case of
heart failure.”

“He does, does he? That is very interesting—very interesting,” murmured
Poirot softly. “And Mrs. Cavendish?”

A faint cloud passed over John’s face.

“I have not the least idea what my wife’s views on the subject are.”

The answer brought a momentary stiffness in its train. John broke the
rather awkward silence by saying with a slight effort:

“I told you, didn’t I, that Mr. Inglethorp has returned?”

Poirot bent his head.

“It’s an awkward position for all of us. Of course one has to treat him
as usual—but, hang it all, one’s gorge does rise at sitting down to eat
with a possible murderer!”

Poirot nodded sympathetically.

“I quite understand. It is a very difficult situation for you, Mr.
Cavendish. I would like to ask you one question. Mr. Inglethorp’s
reason for not returning last night was, I believe, that he had
forgotten the latch-key. Is not that so?”

“Yes.”

“I suppose you are quite sure that the latch-key _was_ forgotten—that
he did not take it after all?”

“I have no idea. I never thought of looking. We always keep it in the
hall drawer. I’ll go and see if it’s there now.”

Poirot held up his hand with a faint smile.

“No, no, Mr. Cavendish, it is too late now. I am certain that you would
find it. If Mr. Inglethorp did take it, he has had ample time to
replace it by now.”

“But do you think——”

“I think nothing. If anyone had chanced to look this morning before his
return, and seen it there, it would have been a valuable point in his
favour. That is all.”

John looked perplexed.

“Do not worry,” said Poirot smoothly. “I assure you that you need not
let it trouble you. Since you are so kind, let us go and have some
breakfast.”

Everyone was assembled in the dining-room. Under the circumstances, we
were naturally not a cheerful party. The reaction after a shock is
always trying, and I think we were all suffering from it. Decorum and
good breeding naturally enjoined that our demeanour should be much as
usual, yet I could not help wondering if this self-control were really
a matter of great difficulty. There were no red eyes, no signs of
secretly indulged grief. I felt that I was right in my opinion that
Dorcas was the person most affected by the personal side of the
HAPTER II. THE 16TH AND 17TH OF JULY

I had arrived at Styles on the 5th of July. I come now to the events of
the 16th and 17th of that month. For the convenience of the reader I
will recapitulate the incidents of those days in as exact a manner as
possible. They were elicited subsequently at the trial by a process of
long and tedious cross-examinations.

I received a letter from Evelyn Howard a couple of days after her
departure, telling me she was working as a nurse at the big hospital in
Middlingham, a manufacturing town some fifteen miles away, and begging
me to let her know if Mrs. Inglethorp should show any wish to be
reconciled.

The only fly in the ointment of my peaceful days was Mrs. Cavendish’s
extraordinary, and, for my part, unaccountable preference for the
society of Dr. Bauerstein. What she saw in the man I cannot imagine,
but she was always asking him up to the house, and often went off for
long expeditions with him. I must confess that I was quite unable to
see his attraction.

The 16th of July fell on a Monday. It was a day of turmoil. The famous
bazaar had taken place on Saturday, and an entertainment, in connection
with the same charity, at which Mrs. Inglethorp was to recite a War
poem, was to be held that night. We were all busy during the morning
arranging and decorating the Hall in the village where it was to take
place. We had a late luncheon and spent the afternoon resting in the
garden. I noticed that John’s manner was somewhat unusual. He seemed
very excited and restless.

After tea, Mrs. Inglethorp went to lie down to rest before her efforts
in the evening and I challenged Mary Cavendish to a single at tennis.

About a quarter to seven, Mrs. Inglethorp called us that we should be
late as supper was early that night. We had rather a scramble to get
ready in time; and before the meal was over the motor was waiting at
the door.

The entertainment was a great success, Mrs. Inglethorp’s recitation
receiving tremendous applause. There were also some tableaux in which
Cynthia took part. She did not return with us, having been asked to a
supper party, and to remain the night with some friends who had been
acting with her in the tableaux.

The following morning, Mrs. Inglethorp stayed in bed to breakfast, as
she was rather overtired; but she appeared in her briskest mood about
12.30, and swept Lawrence and myself off to a luncheon party.

“Such a charming invitation from Mrs. Rolleston. Lady Tadminster’s
sister, you know. The Rollestons came over with the Conqueror—one of
our oldest families.”

Mary had excused herself on the plea of an engagement with Dr.
Bauerstein.

We had a pleasant luncheon, and as we drove away Lawrence suggested
that we should return by Tadminster, which was barely a mile out of our
way, and pay a visit to Cynthia in her dispensary. Mrs. Inglethorp
replied that this was an excellent idea, but as she had several letters
to write she would drop us there, and we could come back with Cynthia
in the pony-trap.

We were detained under suspicion by the hospital porter, until Cynthia
appeared to vouch for us, looking very cool and sweet in her long white
overall. She took us up to her sanctum, and introduced us to her fellow
dispenser, a rather awe-inspiring individual, whom Cynthia cheerily
addressed as “Nibs.”

“What a lot of bottles!” I exclaimed, as my eye travelled round the
small room. “Do you really know what’s in them all?”

“Say something original,” groaned Cynthia. “Every single person who
comes up here says that. We are really thinking of bestowing a prize on
the first individual who does _not_ say: ‘What a lot of bottles!’ And I
know the next thing you’re going to say is: ‘How many people have you
poisoned?’”

I pleaded guilty with a laugh.

“If you people only knew how fatally easy it is to poison someone by
mistake, you wouldn’t joke about it. Come on, let’s have tea. We’ve got
all sorts of secret stories in that cupboard. No, Lawrence—that’s the
poison cupboard. The big cupboard—that’s right.”

We had a very cheery tea, and assisted Cynthia to wash up afterwards.
We had just put away the last tea-spoon when a knock came at the door.
The countenances of Cynthia and Nibs were suddenly petrified into a
stern and forbidding expression.

“Come in,” said Cynthia, in a sharp professional tone.

A young and rather scared looking nurse appeared with a bottle which
she proffered to Nibs, who waved her towards Cynthia with the somewhat
enigmatical remark:

“_I_’m not really here to-day.”

Cynthia took the bottle and examined it with the severity of a judge.

“This should have been sent up this morning.”

“Sister is very sorry. She forgot.”

“Sister should read the rules outside the door.”

I gathered from the little nurse’s expression that there was not the
least likelihood of her having the hardihood to retail this message to
the dreaded “Sister”.

“So now it can’t be done until to-morrow,” finished Cynthia.

“Don’t you think you could possibly let us have it to-night?”

“Well,” said Cynthia graciously, “we are very busy, but if we have time
it shall be done.”

The little nurse withdrew, and Cynthia promptly took a jar from the
shelf, refilled the bottle, and placed it on the table outside the
door.

I laughed.

“Discipline must be maintained?”

“Exactly. Come out on our little balcony. You can see all the outside
wards there.”

I followed Cynthia and her friend and they pointed out the different
wards to me. Lawrence remained behind, but after a few moments Cynthia
called to him over her shoulder to come and join us. Then she looked at
her watch.

“Nothing more to do, Nibs?”

“No.”

“All right. Then we can lock up and go.”

I had seen Lawrence in quite a different light that afternoon. Compared
to John, he was an astoundingly difficult person to get to know. He was
the opposite of his brother in almost every respect, being unusually
shy and reserved. Yet he had a certain charm of manner, and I fancied
that, if one really knew him well, one could have a deep affection for
him. I had always fancied that his manner to Cynthia was rather
constrained, and that she on her side was inclined to be shy of him.
But they were both gay enough this afternoon, and chatted together like
a couple of children.

As we drove through the village, I remembered that I wanted some
stamps, so accordingly we pulled up at the post office.

As I came out again, I cannoned into a little man who was just
entering. I drew aside and apologised, when suddenly, with a loud
exclamation, he clasped me in his arms and kissed me warmly.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings!” he cried. “It is indeed _mon ami_ Hastings!”

“Poirot!” I exclaimed.

I turned to the pony-trap.

“This is a very pleasant meeting for me, Miss Cynthia. This is my old
friend, Monsieur Poirot, whom I have not seen for years.”

“Oh, we know Monsieur Poirot,” said Cynthia gaily. “But I had no idea
he was a friend of yours.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Poirot seriously. “I know Mademoiselle Cynthia. It
is by the charity of that good Mrs. Inglethorp that I am here.” Then,
as I looked at him inquiringly: “Yes, my friend, she had kindly
extended hospitality to seven of my countrypeople who, alas, are
refugees from their native land. We Belgians will always remember her
with gratitude.”

Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more than
five feet, four inches, but carried himself with great dignity. His
head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little
on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. The neatness of
his attire was almost incredible. I believe a speck of dust would have
caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandified
little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his
time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police. As a
detective, his _flair_ had been extraordinary, and he had achieved
triumphs by unravelling some of the most baffling cases of the day.

He pointed out to me the little house inhabited by him and his fellow
Belgians, and I promised to go and see him at an early date. Then he
raised his hat with a flourish to Cynthia, and we drove away.

“He’s a dear little man,” said Cynthia. “I’d no idea you knew him.”

“You’ve been entertaining a celebrity unawares,” I replied.

And, for the rest of the way home, I recited to them the various
exploits and triumphs of Hercule Poirot.

We arrived back in a very cheerful mood. As we entered the hall, Mrs.
Inglethorp came out of her boudoir. She looked flushed and upset.

“Oh, it’s you,” she said.

“Is there anything the matter, Aunt Emily?” asked Cynthia.

“Certainly not,” said Mrs. Inglethorp sharply. “What should there be?”
Then catching sight of Dorcas, the parlourmaid, going into the
dining-room, she called to her to bring some stamps into the boudoir.

“Yes, m’m.” The old servant hesitated, then added diffidently: “Don’t
you think, m’m, you’d better get to bed? You’re looking very tired.”

“Perhaps you’re right, Dorcas—yes—no—not now. I’ve some letters I must
finish by post-time. Have you lighted the fire in my room as I told
you?”

“Yes, m’m.”

“Then I’ll go to bed directly after supper.”

She went into the boudoir again, and Cynthia stared after her.

“Goodness gracious! I wonder what’s up?” she said to Lawrence.

He did not seem to have heard her, for without a word he turned on his
heel and went out of the house.

I suggested a quick game of tennis before supper and, Cynthia agreeing,
I ran upstairs to fetch my racquet.

Mrs. Cavendish was coming down the stairs. It may have been my fancy,
but she, too, was looking odd and disturbed.

“Had a good walk with Dr. Bauerstein?” I asked, trying to appear as
indifferent as I could.

“I didn’t go,” she replied abruptly. “Where is Mrs. Inglethorp?”

“In the boudoir.”

Her hand clenched itself on the banisters, then she seemed to nerve
herself for some encounter, and went rapidly past me down the stairs
across the hall to the boudoir, the door of which she shut behind her.

As I ran out to the tennis court a few moments later, I had to pass the
open boudoir window, and was unable to help overhearing the following
scrap of dialogue. Mary Cavendish was saying in the voice of a woman
desperately controlling herself:

“Then you won’t show it to me?”

To which Mrs. Inglethorp replied:

“My dear Mary, it has nothing to do with that matter.”

“Then show it to me.”

“I tell you it is not what you imagine. It does not concern you in the
least.”

To which Mary Cavendish replied, with a rising bitterness:

“Of course, I might have known you would shield him.”

Cynthia was waiting for me, and greeted me eagerly with:

“I say! There’s been the most awful row! I’ve got it all out of
Dorcas.”

“What kind of a row?”

“Between Aunt Emily and _him_. I do hope she’s found him out at last!”

“Was Dorcas there, then?”

“Of course not. She ‘happened to be near the door’. It was a real old
bust-up. I do wish I knew what it was all about.”

I thought of Mrs. Raikes’s gipsy face, and Evelyn Howard’s warnings,
but wisely decided to hold my peace, whilst Cynthia exhausted every
possible hypothesis, and cheerfully hoped, “Aunt Emily will send him
away, and will never speak to him again.”

I was anxious to get hold of John, but he was nowhere to be seen.
Evidently something very momentous had occurred that afternoon. I tried
to forget the few words I had overheard; but, do what I would, I could
not dismiss them altogether from my mind. What was Mary Cavendish’s
concern in the matter?

Mr. Inglethorp was in the drawing-room when I came down to supper. His
face was impassive as ever, and the strange unreality of the man struck
me afresh.

Mrs. Inglethorp came down last. She still looked agitated, and during
the meal there was a somewhat constrained silence. Inglethorp was
unusually quiet. As a rule, he surrounded his wife with little
attentions, placing a cushion at her back, and altogether playing the
part of the devoted husband. Immediately after supper, Mrs. Inglethorp
retired to her boudoir again.

“Send my coffee in here, Mary,” she called. “I’ve just five minutes to
catch the post.”

Cynthia and I went and sat by the open window in the drawing-room. Mary
Cavendish brought our coffee to us. She seemed excited.

“Do you young people want lights, or do you enjoy the twilight?” she
asked. “Will you take Mrs. Inglethorp her coffee, Cynthia? I will pour
it out.”

“Do not trouble, Mary,” said Inglethorp. “I will take it to Emily.” He
poured it out, and went out of the room carrying it carefully.

Lawrence followed him, and Mrs. Cavendish sat down by us.

We three sat for some time in silence. It was a glorious night, hot and
still. Mrs. Cavendish fanned herself gently with a palm leaf.

“It’s almost too hot,” she murmured. “We shall have a thunderstorm.”

Alas, that these harmonious moments can never endure! My paradise was
rudely shattered by the sound of a well known, and heartily disliked,
voice in the hall.

“Dr. Bauerstein!” exclaimed Cynthia. “What a funny time to come.”

I glanced jealously at Mary Cavendish, but she seemed quite
undisturbed, the delicate pallor of her cheeks did not vary.

In a few moments, Alfred Inglethorp had ushered the doctor in, the
latter laughing, and protesting that he was in no fit state for a
drawing-room. In truth, he presented a sorry spectacle, being literally
plastered with mud.

“What have you been doing, doctor?” cried Mrs. Cavendish.

“I must make my apologies,” said the doctor. “I did not really mean to
come in, but Mr. Inglethorp insisted.”

“Well, Bauerstein, you are in a plight,” said John, strolling in from
the hall. “Have some coffee, and tell us what you have been up to.”

“Thank you, I will.” He laughed rather ruefully, as he described how he
had discovered a very rare species of fern in an inaccessible place,
and in his efforts to obtain it had lost his footing, and slipped
ignominiously into a neighbouring pond.

“The sun soon dried me off,” he added, “but I’m afraid my appearance is
very disreputable.”

At this juncture, Mrs. Inglethorp called to Cynthia from the hall, and
the girl ran out.

“Just carry up my despatch-case, will you, dear? I’m going to bed.”

The door into the hall was a wide one. I had risen when Cynthia did,
John was close by me. There were therefore three witnesses who could
swear that Mrs. Inglethorp was carrying her coffee, as yet untasted, in
her hand.

My evening was utterly and entirely spoilt by the presence of Dr.
Bauerstein. It seemed to me the man would never go. He rose at last,
however, and I breathed a sigh of relief.

“I’ll walk down to the village with you,” said Mr. Inglethorp. “I must
see our agent over those estate accounts.” He turned to John. “No one
need sit up. I will take the latch-key.”






CHAPTER III. THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDY

To make this part of my story clear, I append the following plan of the
first floor of Styles. The servants’ rooms are reached through the door
B. They have no communication with the right wing, where the
Inglethorps’ rooms were situated.




       01



It seemed to be the middle of the night when I was awakened by Lawrence
Cavendish. He had a candle in his hand, and the agitation of his face
told me at once that something was seriously wrong.

“What’s the matter?” I asked, sitting up in bed, and trying to collect
my scattered thoughts.

“We are afraid my mother is very ill. She seems to be having some kind
of fit. Unfortunately she has locked herself in.”

“I’ll come at once.”

I sprang out of bed; and, pulling on a dressing-gown, followed Lawrence
along the passage and the gallery to the right wing of the house.

John Cavendish joined us, and one or two of the servants were standing
round in a state of awe-stricken excitement. Lawrence turned to his
brother.

“What do you think we had better do?”

Never, I thought, had his indecision of character been more apparent.

John rattled the handle of Mrs. Inglethorp’s door violently, but with
no effect. It was obviously locked or bolted on the inside. The whole
household was aroused by now. The most alarming sounds were audible
from the interior of the room. Clearly something must be done.

“Try going through Mr. Inglethorp’s room, sir,” cried Dorcas. “Oh, the
poor mistress!”

Suddenly I realized that Alfred Inglethorp was not with us—that he
alone had given no sign of his presence. John opened the door of his
room. It was pitch dark, but Lawrence was following with the candle,
and by its feeble light we saw that the bed had not been slept in, and
that there was no sign of the room having been occupied.

We went straight to the connecting door. That, too, was locked or
bolted on the inside. What was to be done?

“Oh, dear, sir,” cried Dorcas, wringing her hands, “what ever shall we
do?”

“We must try and break the door in, I suppose. It’ll be a tough job,
though. Here, let one of the maids go down and wake Baily and tell him
to go for Dr. Wilkins at once. Now then, we’ll have a try at the door.
Half a moment, though, isn’t there a door into Miss Cynthia’s rooms?”

“Yes, sir, but that’s always bolted. It’s never been undone.”

“Well, we might just see.”

He ran rapidly down the corridor to Cynthia’s room. Mary Cavendish was
there, shaking the girl—who must have been an unusually sound
sleeper—and trying to wake her.

In a moment or two he was back.

“No good. That’s bolted too. We must break in the door. I think this
one is a shade less solid than the one in the passage.”

We strained and heaved together. The framework of the door was solid,
and for a long time it resisted our efforts, but at last we felt it
give beneath our weight, and finally, with a resounding crash, it was
burst open.

We stumbled in together, Lawrence still holding his candle. Mrs.
Inglethorp was lying on the bed, her whole form agitated by violent
convulsions, in one of which she must have overturned the table beside
her. As we entered, however, her limbs relaxed, and she fell back upon
the pillows.

John strode across the room, and lit the gas. Turning to Annie, one of
the housemaids, he sent her downstairs to the dining-room for brandy.
Then he went across to his mother whilst I unbolted the door that gave
on the corridor.

I turned to Lawrence, to suggest that I had better leave them now that
there was no further need of my services, but the words were frozen on
my lips. Never have I seen such a ghastly look on any man’s face. He
was white as chalk, the candle he held in his shaking hand was
sputtering onto the carpet, and his eyes, petrified with terror, or
some such kindred emotion, stared fixedly over my head at a point on
the further wall. It was as though he had seen something that turned
him to stone. I instinctively followed the direction of his eyes, but I
could see nothing unusual. The still feebly flickering ashes in the
grate, and the row of prim ornaments on the mantelpiece, were surely
harmless enough.

The violence of Mrs. Inglethorp’s attack seemed to be passing. She was
able to speak in short gasps.

“Better now—very sudden—stupid of me—to lock myself in.”

A shadow fell on the bed and, looking up, I saw Mary Cavendish standing
near the door with her arm around Cynthia. She seemed to be supporting
the girl, who looked utterly dazed and unlike herself. Her face was
heavily flushed, and she yawned repeatedly.

“Poor Cynthia is quite frightened,” said Mrs. Cavendish in a low clear
voice. She herself, I noticed, was dressed in her white land smock.
Then it must be later than I thought. I saw that a faint streak of
daylight was showing through the curtains of the windows, and that the
clock on the mantelpiece pointed to close upon five o’clock.

A strangled cry from the bed startled me. A fresh access of pain seized
the unfortunate old lady. The convulsions were of a violence terrible
to behold. Everything was confusion. We thronged round her, powerless
to help or alleviate. A final convulsion lifted her from the bed, until
she appeared to rest upon her head and her heels, with her body arched
in an extraordinary manner. In vain Mary and John tried to administer
more brandy. The moments flew. Again the body arched itself in that
peculiar fashion.

At that moment, Dr. Bauerstein pushed his way authoritatively into the
room. For one instant he stopped dead, staring at the figure on the
bed, and, at the same instant, Mrs. Inglethorp cried out in a strangled
voice, her eyes fixed on the doctor:

“Alfred—Alfred——” Then she fell back motionless on the pillows.

With a stride, the doctor reached the bed, and seizing her arms worked
them energetically, applying what I knew to be artificial respiration.
He issued a few short sharp orders to the servants. An imperious wave
of his hand drove us all to the door. We watched him, fascinated,
though I think we all knew in our hearts that it was too late, and that
nothing could be done now. I could see by the expression on his face
that he himself had little hope.

Finally he abandoned his task, shaking his head gravely. At that
moment, we heard footsteps outside, and Dr. Wilkins, Mrs. Inglethorp’s
own doctor, a portly, fussy little man, came bustling in.

In a few words Dr. Bauerstein explained how he had happened to be
passing the lodge gates as the car came out, and had run up to the
house as fast as he could, whilst the car went on to fetch Dr. Wilkins.
With a faint gesture of the hand, he indicated the figure on the bed.

“Ve—ry sad. Ve—ry sad,” murmured Dr. Wilkins. “Poor dear lady. Always
did far too much—far too much—against my advice. I warned her. Her
heart was far from strong. ‘Take it easy,’ I said to her,
‘Take—it—easy’. But no—her zeal for good works was too great. Nature
rebelled. Na—ture—re—belled.”

Dr. Bauerstein, I noticed, was watching the local doctor narrowly. He
still kept his eyes fixed on him as he spoke.

“The convulsions were of a peculiar violence, Dr. Wilkins. I am sorry
you were not here in time to witness them. They were quite—tetanic in
character.”

“Ah!” said Dr. Wilkins wisely.

“I should like to speak to you in private,” said Dr. Bauerstein. He
turned to John. “You do not object?”

“Certainly not.”

We all trooped out into the corridor, leaving the two doctors alone,
and I heard the key turned in the lock behind us.

We went slowly down the stairs. I was violently excited. I have a
certain talent for deduction, and Dr. Bauerstein’s manner had started a
flock of wild surmises in my mind. Mary Cavendish laid her hand upon my
arm.

“What is it? Why did Dr. Bauerstein seem so—peculiar?”

I looked at her.

“Do you know what I think?”

“What?”

“Listen!” I looked round, the others were out of earshot. I lowered my
voice to a whisper. “I believe she has been poisoned! I’m certain Dr.
Bauerstein suspects it.”

“_What?_” She shrank against the wall, the pupils of her eyes dilating
wildly. Then, with a sudden cry that startled me, she cried out: “No,
no—not that—not that!” And breaking from me, fled up the stairs. I
followed her, afraid that she was going to faint. I found her leaning
against the bannisters, deadly pale. She waved me away impatiently.

“No, no—leave me. I’d rather be alone. Let me just be quiet for a
minute or two. Go down to the others.”

I obeyed her reluctantly. John and Lawrence were in the dining-room. I
joined them. We were all silent, but I suppose I voiced the thoughts of
us all when I at last broke it by saying:

“Where is Mr. Inglethorp?”

John shook his head.

“He’s not in the house.”

Our eyes met. Where _was_ Alfred Inglethorp? His absence was strange
and inexplicable. I remembered Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words. What lay
beneath them? What more could she have told us, if she had had time?

At last we heard the doctors descending the stairs. Dr. Wilkins was
looking important and excited, and trying to conceal an inward
exultation under a manner of decorous calm. Dr. Bauerstein remained in
the background, his grave bearded face unchanged. Dr. Wilkins was the
spokesman for the two. He addressed himself to John:

“Mr. Cavendish, I should like your consent to a post-mortem.”

“Is that necessary?” asked John gravely. A spasm of pain crossed his
face.

“Absolutely,” said Dr. Bauerstein.

“You mean by that——?”

“That neither Dr. Wilkins nor myself could give a death certificate
under the circumstances.”

John bent his head.

“In that case, I have no alternative but to agree.”

“Thank you,” said Dr. Wilkins briskly. “We propose that it should take
place to-morrow night—or rather to-night.” And he glanced at the
daylight. “Under the circumstances, I am afraid an inquest can hardly
be avoided—these formalities are necessary, but I beg that you won’t
distress yourselves.”

There was a pause, and then Dr. Bauerstein drew two keys from his
pocket, and handed them to John.

“These are the keys of the two rooms. I have locked them and, in my
opinion, they would be better kept locked for the present.”

The doctors then departed.

I had been turning over an idea in my head, and I felt that the moment
had now come to broach it. Yet I was a little chary of doing so. John,
I knew, had a horror of any kind of publicity, and was an easygoing
optimist, who preferred never to meet trouble half-way. It might be
difficult to convince him of the soundness of my plan. Lawrence, on the
other hand, being less conventional, and having more imagination, I
felt I might count upon as an ally. There was no doubt that the moment
had come for me to take the lead.

“John,” I said, “I am going to ask you something.”

“Well?”

“You remember my speaking of my friend Poirot? The Belgian who is here?
He has been a most famous detective.”

“Yes.”

“I want you to let me call him in—to investigate this matter.”

“What—now? Before the post-mortem?”

“Yes, time is an advantage if—if—there has been foul play.”

“Rubbish!” cried Lawrence angrily. “In my opinion the whole thing is a
mare’s nest of Bauerstein’s! Wilkins hadn’t an idea of such a thing,
until Bauerstein put it into his head. But, like all specialists,
Bauerstein’s got a bee in his bonnet. Poisons are his hobby, so of
course he sees them everywhere.”

I confess that I was surprised by Lawrence’s attitude. He was so seldom
vehement about anything.

John hesitated.

“I can’t feel as you do, Lawrence,” he said at last. “I’m inclined to
give Hastings a free hand, though I should prefer to wait a bit. We
don’t want any unnecessary scandal.”

“No, no,” I cried eagerly, “you need have no fear of that. Poirot is
discretion itself.”

“Very well, then, have it your own way. I leave it in your hands.
Though, if it is as we suspect, it seems a clear enough case. God
forgive me if I am wronging him!”

I looked at my watch. It was six o’clock. I determined to lose no time.

Five minutes’ delay, however, I allowed myself. I spent it in
ransacking the library until I discovered a medical book which gave a
description of strychnine poisoning.






CHAPTER IV. POIROT INVESTIGATES

The house which the Belgians occupied in the village was quite close to
the park gates. One could save time by taking a narrow path through the
long grass, which cut off the detours of the winding drive. So I,
accordingly, went that way. I had nearly reached the lodge, when my
attention was arrested by the running figure of a man approaching me.
It was Mr. Inglethorp. Where had he been? How did he intend to explain
his absence?

He accosted me eagerly.

“My God! This is terrible! My poor wife! I have only just heard.”

“Where have you been?” I asked.

“Denby kept me late last night. It was one o’clock before we’d
finished. Then I found that I’d forgotten the latch-key after all. I
didn’t want to arouse the household, so Denby gave me a bed.”

“How did you hear the news?” I asked.

“Wilkins knocked Denby up to tell him. My poor Emily! She was so
self-sacrificing—such a noble character. She over-taxed her strength.”

A wave of revulsion swept over me. What a consummate hypocrite the man
was!

“I must hurry on,” I said, thankful that he did not ask me whither I
was bound.

In a few minutes I was knocking at the door of Leastways Cottage.

Getting no answer, I repeated my summons impatiently. A window above me
was cautiously opened, and Poirot himself looked out.

He gave an exclamation of surprise at seeing me. In a few brief words,
I explained the tragedy that had occurred, and that I wanted his help.

“Wait, my friend, I will let you in, and you shall recount to me the
affair whilst I dress.”

In a few moments he had unbarred the door, and I followed him up to his
room. There he installed me in a chair, and I related the whole story,
keeping back nothing, and omitting no circumstance, however
insignificant, whilst he himself made a careful and deliberate toilet.

I told him of my awakening, of Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words, of her
husband’s absence, of the quarrel the day before, of the scrap of
conversation between Mary and her mother-in-law that I had overheard,
of the former quarrel between Mrs. Inglethorp and Evelyn Howard, and of
the latter’s innuendoes.

I was hardly as clear as I could wish. I repeated myself several times,
and occasionally had to go back to some detail that I had forgotten.
Poirot smiled kindly on me.

“The mind is confused? Is it not so? Take time, _mon ami_. You are
agitated; you are excited—it is but natural. Presently, when we are
calmer, we will arrange the facts, neatly, each in his proper place. We
will examine—and reject. Those of importance we will put on one side;
those of no importance, pouf!”—he screwed up his cherub-like face, and
puffed comically enough—“blow them away!”

“That’s all very well,” I objected, “but how are you going to decide
what is important, and what isn’t? That always seems the difficulty to
me.”

Poirot shook his head energetically. He was now arranging his moustache
with exquisite care.

“Not so. _Voyons!_ One fact leads to another—so we continue. Does the
next fit in with that? _A merveille!_ Good! We can proceed. This next
little fact—no! Ah, that is curious! There is something missing—a link
in the chain that is not there. We examine. We search. And that little
curious fact, that possibly paltry little detail that will not tally,
we put it here!” He made an extravagant gesture with his hand. “It is
significant! It is tremendous!”

“Y—es——”

“Ah!” Poirot shook his forefinger so fiercely at me that I quailed
before it. “Beware! Peril to the detective who says: ‘It is so small—it
does not matter. It will not agree. I will forget it.’ That way lies
confusion! Everything matters.”

“I know. You always told me that. That’s why I have gone into all the
details of this thing whether they seemed to me relevant or not.”

“And I am pleased with you. You have a good memory, and you have given
me the facts faithfully. Of the order in which you present them, I say
nothing—truly, it is deplorable! But I make allowances—you are upset.
To that I attribute the circumstance that you have omitted one fact of
paramount importance.”

“What is that?” I asked.

“You have not told me if Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night.”

I stared at him. Surely the war had affected the little man’s brain. He
was carefully engaged in brushing his coat before putting it on, and
seemed wholly engrossed in the task.

“I don’t remember,” I said. “And, anyway, I don’t see——”

“You do not see? But it is of the first importance.”

“I can’t see why,” I said, rather nettled. “As far as I can remember,
she didn’t eat much. She was obviously upset, and it had taken her
appetite away. That was only natural.”

“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “it was only natural.”

He opened a drawer, and took out a small despatch-case, then turned to
me.

“Now I am ready. We will proceed to the château, and study matters on
the spot. Excuse me, _mon ami_, you dressed in haste, and your tie is
on one side. Permit me.” With a deft gesture, he rearranged it.

“_Ça y est!_ Now, shall we start?”

We hurried up the village, and turned in at the lodge gates. Poirot
stopped for a moment, and gazed sorrowfully over the beautiful expanse
of park, still glittering with morning dew.

“So beautiful, so beautiful, and yet, the poor family, plunged in
sorrow, prostrated with grief.”

He looked at me keenly as he spoke, and I was aware that I reddened
under his prolonged gaze.

Was the family prostrated by grief? Was the sorrow at Mrs. Inglethorp’s
death so great? I realized that there was an emotional lack in the
atmosphere. The dead woman had not the gift of commanding love. Her
death was a shock and a distress, but she would not be passionately
regretted.

Poirot seemed to follow my thoughts. He nodded his head gravely.

“No, you are right,” he said, “it is not as though there was a blood
tie. She has been kind and generous to these Cavendishes, but she was
not their own mother. Blood tells—always remember that—blood tells.”

“Poirot,” I said, “I wish you would tell me why you wanted to know if
Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night? I have been turning it over in my
mind, but I can’t see how it has anything to do with the matter?”

He was silent for a minute or two as we walked along, but finally he
said:

“I do not mind telling you—though, as you know, it is not my habit to
explain until the end is reached. The present contention is that Mrs.
Inglethorp died of strychnine poisoning, presumably administered in her
coffee.”

“Yes?”

“Well, what time was the coffee served?”

“About eight o’clock.”

“Therefore she drank it between then and half-past eight—certainly not
much later. Well, strychnine is a fairly rapid poison. Its effects
would be felt very soon, probably in about an hour. Yet, in Mrs.
Inglethorp’s case, the symptoms do not manifest themselves until five
o’clock the next morning: nine hours! But a heavy meal, taken at about
the same time as the poison, might retard its effects, though hardly to
that extent. Still, it is a possibility to be taken into account. But,
according to you, she ate very little for supper, and yet the symptoms
do not develop until early the next morning! Now that is a curious
circumstance, my friend. Something may arise at the autopsy to explain
it. In the meantime, remember it.”

As we neared the house, John came out and met us. His face looked weary
and haggard.

“This is a very dreadful business, Monsieur Poirot,” he said. “Hastings
has explained to you that we are anxious for no publicity?”

“I comprehend perfectly.”

“You see, it is only suspicion so far. We have nothing to go upon.”

“Precisely. It is a matter of precaution only.”

John turned to me, taking out his cigarette-case, and lighting a
cigarette as he did so.

“You know that fellow Inglethorp is back?”

“Yes. I met him.”

John flung the match into an adjacent flower bed, a proceeding which
was too much for Poirot’s feelings. He retrieved it, and buried it
neatly.

“It’s jolly difficult to know how to treat him.”

“That difficulty will not exist long,” pronounced Poirot quietly.

John looked puzzled, not quite understanding the portent of this
cryptic saying. He handed the two keys which Dr. Bauerstein had given
him to me.

“Show Monsieur Poirot everything he wants to see.”

“The rooms are locked?” asked Poirot.

“Dr. Bauerstein considered it advisable.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“Then he is very sure. Well, that simplifies matters for us.”

We went up together to the room of the tragedy. For convenience I
append a plan of the room and the principal articles of furniture in
it.




       02



Poirot locked the door on the inside, and proceeded to a minute
inspection of the room. He darted from one object to the other with the
agility of a grasshopper. I remained by the door, fearing to obliterate
any clues. Poirot, however, did not seem grateful to me for my
forbearance.

“What have you, my friend,” he cried, “that you remain there like—how
do you say it?—ah, yes, the stuck pig?”

I explained that I was afraid of obliterating any foot-marks.

“Foot-marks? But what an idea! There has already been practically an
army in the room! What foot-marks are we likely to find? No, come here
and aid me in my search. I will put down my little case until I need
it.”

He did so, on the round table by the window, but it was an ill-advised
proceeding; for, the top of it being loose, it tilted up, and
precipitated the despatch-case on the floor.

“_Eh voilà une table!_” cried Poirot. “Ah, my friend, one may live in a
big house and yet have no comfort.”

After which piece of moralizing, he resumed his search.

A small purple despatch-case, with a key in the lock, on the
writing-table, engaged his attention for some time. He took out the key
from the lock, and passed it to me to inspect. I saw nothing peculiar,
however. It was an ordinary key of the Yale type, with a bit of twisted
wire through the handle.

Next, he examined the framework of the door we had broken in, assuring
himself that the bolt had really been shot. Then he went to the door
opposite leading into Cynthia’s room. That door was also bolted, as I
had stated. However, he went to the length of unbolting it, and opening
and shutting it several times; this he did with the utmost precaution
against making any noise. Suddenly something in the bolt itself seemed
to rivet his attention. He examined it carefully, and then, nimbly
whipping out a pair of small forceps from his case, he drew out some
minute particle which he carefully sealed up in a tiny envelope.

On the chest of drawers there was a tray with a spirit lamp and a small
saucepan on it. A small quantity of a dark fluid remained in the
saucepan, and an empty cup and saucer that had been drunk out of stood
near it.

I wondered how I could have been so unobservant as to overlook this.
Here was a clue worth having. Poirot delicately dipped his finger into
liquid, and tasted it gingerly. He made a grimace.

“Cocoa—with—I think—rum in it.”

He passed on to the debris on the floor, where the table by the bed had
been overturned. A reading-lamp, some books, matches, a bunch of keys,
and the crushed fragments of a coffee-cup lay scattered about.

“Ah, this is curious,” said Poirot.

“I must confess that I see nothing particularly curious about it.”

“You do not? Observe the lamp—the chimney is broken in two places; they
lie there as they fell. But see, the coffee-cup is absolutely smashed
to powder.”

“Well,” I said wearily, “I suppose someone must have stepped on it.”

“Exactly,” said Poirot, in an odd voice. “Someone stepped on it.”

He rose from his knees, and walked slowly across to the mantelpiece,
where he stood abstractedly fingering the ornaments, and straightening
them—a trick of his when he was agitated.

“_Mon ami_,” he said, turning to me, “somebody stepped on that cup,
grinding it to powder, and the reason they did so was either because it
contained strychnine or—which is far more serious—because it did not
contain strychnine!”

I made no reply. I was bewildered, but I knew that it was no good
asking him to explain. In a moment or two he roused himself, and went
on with his investigations. He picked up the bunch of keys from the
floor, and twirling them round in his fingers finally selected one,
very bright and shining, which he tried in the lock of the purple
despatch-case. It fitted, and he opened the box, but after a moment’s
hesitation, closed and relocked it, and slipped the bunch of keys, as
well as the key that had originally stood in the lock, into his own
pocket.

“I have no authority to go through these papers. But it should be
done—at once!”

He then made a very careful examination of the drawers of the
wash-stand. Crossing the room to the left-hand window, a round stain,
hardly visible on the dark brown carpet, seemed to interest him
particularly. He went down on his knees, examining it minutely—even
going so far as to smell it.

Finally, he poured a few drops of the cocoa into a test tube, sealing
it up carefully. His next proceeding was to take out a little notebook.

“We have found in this room,” he said, writing busily, “six points of
interest. Shall I enumerate them, or will you?”

“Oh, you,” I replied hastily.

“Very well, then. One, a coffee-cup that has been ground into powder;
two, a despatch-case with a key in the lock; three, a stain on the
floor.”

“That may have been done some time ago,” I interrupted.

“No, for it is still perceptibly damp and smells of coffee. Four, a
fragment of some dark green fabric—only a thread or two, but
recognizable.”

“Ah!” I cried. “That was what you sealed up in the envelope.”

“Yes. It may turn out to be a piece of one of Mrs. Inglethorp’s own
dresses, and quite unimportant. We shall see. Five, _this_!” With a
dramatic gesture, he pointed to a large splash of candle grease on the
floor by the writing-table. “It must have been done since yesterday,
otherwise a good housemaid would have at once removed it with
blotting-paper and a hot iron. One of my best hats once—but that is not
to the point.”

“It was very likely done last night. We were very agitated. Or perhaps
Mrs. Inglethorp herself dropped her candle.”

“You brought only one candle into the room?”

“Yes. Lawrence Cavendish was carrying it. But he was very upset. He
seemed to see something over here”—I indicated the mantelpiece—“that
absolutely paralysed him.”

“That is interesting,” said Poirot quickly. “Yes, it is suggestive”—his
eye sweeping the whole length of the wall—“but it was not his candle
that made this great patch, for you perceive that this is white grease;
whereas Monsieur Lawrence’s candle, which is still on the
dressing-table, is pink. On the other hand, Mrs. Inglethorp had no
candlestick in the room, only a reading-lamp.”

“Then,” I said, “what do you deduce?”

To which my friend only made a rather irritating reply, urging me to
use my own natural faculties.

“And the sixth point?” I asked. “I suppose it is the sample of cocoa.”

“No,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “I might have included that in the six,
but I did not. No, the sixth point I will keep to myself for the
present.”

He looked quickly round the room. “There is nothing more to be done
here, I think, unless”—he stared earnestly and long at the dead ashes
in the grate. “The fire burns—and it destroys. But by chance—there
might be—let us see!”

Deftly, on hands and knees, he began to sort the ashes from the grate
into the fender, handling them with the greatest caution. Suddenly, he
gave a faint exclamation.

“The forceps, Hastings!”

I quickly handed them to him, and with skill he extracted a small piece
of half charred paper.

“There, _mon ami!_” he cried. “What do you think of that?”

I scrutinized the fragment. This is an exact reproduction of it:—




       03


I was puzzled. It was unusually thick, quite unlike ordinary notepaper.
Suddenly an idea struck me.

“Poirot!” I cried. “This is a fragment of a will!”

“Exactly.”

I looked up at him sharply.

“You are not surprised?”

“No,” he said gravely, “I expected it.”

I relinquished the piece of paper, and watched him put it away in his
case, with the same methodical care that he bestowed on everything. My
brain was in a whirl. What was this complication of a will? Who had
destroyed it? The person who had left the candle grease on the floor?
Obviously. But how had anyone gained admission? All the doors had been
bolted on the inside.

“Now, my friend,” said Poirot briskly, “we will go. I should like to
ask a few questions of the parlourmaid—Dorcas, her name is, is it not?”

We passed through Alfred Inglethorp’s room, and Poirot delayed long
enough to make a brief but fairly comprehensive examination of it. We
went out through that door, locking both it and that of Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room as before.

I took him down to the boudoir which he had expressed a wish to see,
and went myself in search of Dorcas.

When I returned with her, however, the boudoir was empty.

“Poirot,” I cried, “where are you?”

“I am here, my friend.”

He had stepped outside the French window, and was standing, apparently
lost in admiration, before the various shaped flower beds.

“Admirable!” he murmured. “Admirable! What symmetry! Observe that
crescent; and those diamonds—their neatness rejoices the eye. The
spacing of the plants, also, is perfect. It has been recently done; is
it not so?”

“Yes, I believe they were at it yesterday afternoon. But come in—Dorcas
is here.”

“_Eh bien, eh bien!_ Do not grudge me a moment’s satisfaction of the
eye.”

“Yes, but this affair is more important.”

“And how do you know that these fine begonias are not of equal
importance?”

I shrugged my shoulders. There was really no arguing with him if he
chose to take that line.

“You do not agree? But such things have been. Well, we will come in and
interview the brave Dorcas.”

Dorcas was standing in the boudoir, her hands folded in front of her,
and her grey hair rose in stiff waves under her white cap. She was the
very model and picture of a good old-fashioned servant.

In her attitude towards Poirot, she was inclined to be suspicious, but
he soon broke down her defences. He drew forward a chair.

“Pray be seated, mademoiselle.”

“Thank you, sir.”

“You have been with your mistress many years, is it not so?”

“Ten years, sir.”

“That is a long time, and very faithful service. You were much attached
to her, were you not?”

“She was a very good mistress to me, sir.”

“Then you will not object to answering a few questions. I put them to
you with Mr. Cavendish’s full approval.”

“Oh, certainly, sir.”

“Then I will begin by asking you about the events of yesterday
afternoon. Your mistress had a quarrel?”

“Yes, sir. But I don’t know that I ought——” Dorcas hesitated.

Poirot looked at her keenly.

“My good Dorcas, it is necessary that I should know every detail of
that quarrel as fully as possible. Do not think that you are betraying
your mistress’s secrets. Your mistress lies dead, and it is necessary
that we should know all—if we are to avenge her. Nothing can bring her
back to life, but we do hope, if there has been foul play, to bring the
murderer to justice.”

“Amen to that,” said Dorcas fiercely. “And, naming no names, there’s
_one_ in this house that none of us could ever abide! And an ill day it
was when first _he_ darkened the threshold.”

Poirot waited for her indignation to subside, and then, resuming his
business-like tone, he asked:

“Now, as to this quarrel? What is the first you heard of it?”

“Well, sir, I happened to be going along the hall outside yesterday——”

“What time was that?”

“I couldn’t say exactly, sir, but it wasn’t tea-time by a long way.
Perhaps four o’clock—or it may have been a bit later. Well, sir, as I
said, I happened to be passing along, when I heard voices very loud and
angry in here. I didn’t exactly mean to listen, but—well, there it is.
I stopped. The door was shut, but the mistress was speaking very sharp
and clear, and I heard what she said quite plainly. ‘You have lied to
me, and deceived me,’ she said. I didn’t hear what Mr. Inglethorp
replied. He spoke a good bit lower than she did—but she answered: ‘How
dare you? I have kept you and clothed you and fed you! You owe
everything to me! And this is how you repay me! By bringing disgrace
upon our name!’ Again I didn’t hear what he said, but she went on:
‘Nothing that you can say will make any difference. I see my duty
clearly. My mind is made up. You need not think that any fear of
publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.’ Then I
thought I heard them coming out, so I went off quickly.”

“You are sure it was Mr. Inglethorp’s voice you heard?”

“Oh, yes, sir, whose else’s could it be?”

“Well, what happened next?”

“Later, I came back to the hall; but it was all quiet. At five o’clock,
Mrs. Inglethorp rang the bell and told me to bring her a cup of
tea—nothing to eat—to the boudoir. She was looking dreadful—so white
and upset. ‘Dorcas,’ she says, ‘I’ve had a great shock.’ ‘I’m sorry for
that, m’m,’ I says. ‘You’ll feel better after a nice hot cup of tea,
m’m.’ She had something in her hand. I don’t know if it was a letter,
or just a piece of paper, but it had writing on it, and she kept
staring at it, almost as if she couldn’t believe what was written
there. She whispered to herself, as though she had forgotten I was
there: ‘These few words—and everything’s changed.’ And then she says to
me: ‘Never trust a man, Dorcas, they’re not worth it!’ I hurried off,
and got her a good strong cup of tea, and she thanked me, and said
she’d feel better when she’d drunk it. ‘I don’t know what to do,’ she
says. ‘Scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing, Dorcas.
I’d rather hush it up if I could.’ Mrs. Cavendish came in just then, so
she didn’t say any more.”

“She still had the letter, or whatever it was, in her hand?”



“Yes, sir.”

“What would she be likely to do with it afterwards?”

“Well, I don’t know, sir, I expect she would lock it up in that purple
case of hers.”

“Is that where she usually kept important papers?”

“Yes, sir. She brought it down with her every morning, and took it up
every night.”

“When did she lose the key of it?”

“She missed it yesterday at lunch-time, sir, and told me to look
carefully for it. She was very much put out about it.”

“But she had a duplicate key?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

Dorcas was looking very curiously at him and, to tell the truth, so was
I. What was all this about a lost key? Poirot smiled.

“Never mind, Dorcas, it is my business to know things. Is this the key
that was lost?” He drew from his pocket the key that he had found in
the lock of the despatch-case upstairs.

Dorcas’s eyes looked as though they would pop out of her head.

“That’s it, sir, right enough. But where did you find it? I looked
everywhere for it.”

“Ah, but you see it was not in the same place yesterday as it was
to-day. Now, to pass to another subject, had your mistress a dark green
dress in her wardrobe?”

Dorcas was rather startled by the unexpected question.

“No, sir.”

“Are you quite sure?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

“Has anyone else in the house got a green dress?”

Dorcas reflected.

“Miss Cynthia has a green evening dress.”

“Light or dark green?”

“A light green, sir; a sort of chiffon, they call it.”

“Ah, that is not what I want. And nobody else has anything green?”

“No, sir—not that I know of.”

Poirot’s face did not betray a trace of whether he was disappointed or
otherwise. He merely remarked:

“Good, we will leave that and pass on. Have you any reason to believe
that your mistress was likely to take a sleeping powder last night?”

“Not _last_ night, sir, I know she didn’t.”

“Why do you know so positively?”

“Because the box was empty. She took the last one two days ago, and she
didn’t have any more made up.”

“You are quite sure of that?”

“Positive, sir.”

“Then that is cleared up! By the way, your mistress didn’t ask you to
sign any paper yesterday?”

“To sign a paper? No, sir.”

“When Mr. Hastings and Mr. Lawrence came in yesterday evening, they
found your mistress busy writing letters. I suppose you can give me no
idea to whom these letters were addressed?”

“I’m afraid I couldn’t, sir. I was out in the evening. Perhaps Annie
could tell you, though she’s a careless girl. Never cleared the
coffee-cups away last night. That’s what happens when I’m not here to
look after things.”

Poirot lifted his hand.

“Since they have been left, Dorcas, leave them a little longer, I pray
you. I should like to examine them.”

“Very well, sir.”

“What time did you go out last evening?”

“About six o’clock, sir.”

“Thank you, Dorcas, that is all I have to ask you.” He rose and
strolled to the window. “I have been admiring these flower beds. How
many gardeners are employed here, by the way?”

“Only three now, sir. Five, we had, before the war, when it was kept as
a gentleman’s place should be. I wish you could have seen it then, sir.
A fair sight it was. But now there’s only old Manning, and young
William, and a new-fashioned woman gardener in breeches and such-like.
Ah, these are dreadful times!”

“The good times will come again, Dorcas. At least, we hope so. Now,
will you send Annie to me here?”

“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”

“How did you know that Mrs. Inglethorp took sleeping powders?” I asked,
in lively curiosity, as Dorcas left the room. “And about the lost key
and the duplicate?”

“One thing at a time. As to the sleeping powders, I knew by this.” He
suddenly produced a small cardboard box, such as chemists use for
powders.

“Where did you find it?”

“In the wash-stand drawer in Mrs. Inglethorp’s bedroom. It was Number
Six of my catalogue.”

“But I suppose, as the last powder was taken two days ago, it is not of
much importance?”

“Probably not, but do you notice anything that strikes you as peculiar
about this box?”

I examined it closely.

“No, I can’t say that I do.”

“Look at the label.”

I read the label carefully: “‘One powder to be taken at bedtime, if
required. Mrs. Inglethorp.’ No, I see nothing unusual.”

“Not the fact that there is no chemist’s name?”

“Ah!” I exclaimed. “To be sure, that is odd!”

“Have you ever known a chemist to send out a box like that, without his
printed name?”

“No, I can’t say that I have.”

I was becoming quite excited, but Poirot damped my ardour by remarking:

“Yet the explanation is quite simple. So do not intrigue yourself, my
friend.”

An audible creaking proclaimed the approach of Annie, so I had no time
to reply.

Annie was a fine, strapping girl, and was evidently labouring under
intense excitement, mingled with a certain ghoulish enjoyment of the
tragedy.

Poirot came to the point at once, with a business-like briskness.

“I sent for you, Annie, because I thought you might be able to tell me
something about the letters Mrs. Inglethorp wrote last night. How many
were there? And can you tell me any of the names and addresses?”

Annie considered.

“There were four letters, sir. One was to Miss Howard, and one was to
Mr. Wells, the lawyer, and the other two I don’t think I remember,
sir—oh, yes, one was to Ross’s, the caterers in Tadminster. The other
one, I don’t remember.”

“Think,” urged Poirot.

Annie racked her brains in vain.

“I’m sorry, sir, but it’s clean gone. I don’t think I can have noticed
it.”

“It does not matter,” said Poirot, not betraying any sign of
disappointment. “Now I want to ask you about something else. There is a
saucepan in Mrs. Inglethorp’s room with some cocoa in it. Did she have
that every night?”

“Yes, sir, it was put in her room every evening, and she warmed it up
in the night—whenever she fancied it.”

“What was it? Plain cocoa?”

“Yes, sir, made with milk, with a teaspoonful of sugar, and two
teaspoonfuls of rum in it.”

“Who took it to her room?”

“I did, sir.”

“Always?”

“Yes, sir.”

“At what time?”

“When I went to draw the curtains, as a rule, sir.”

“Did you bring it straight up from the kitchen then?”

“No, sir, you see there’s not much room on the gas stove, so cook used
to make it early, before putting the vegetables on for supper. Then I
used to bring it up, and put it on the table by the swing door, and
take it into her room later.”

“The swing door is in the left wing, is it not?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And the table, is it on this side of the door, or on the
farther—servants’ side?”

“It’s this side, sir.”

“What time did you bring it up last night?”

“About quarter-past seven, I should say, sir.”

“And when did you take it into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room?”

“When I went to shut up, sir. About eight o’clock. Mrs. Inglethorp came
up to bed before I’d finished.”

“Then, between seven-fifteen and eight o’clock, the cocoa was standing
on the table in the left wing?”

“Yes, sir.” Annie had been growing redder and redder in the face, and
now she blurted out unexpectedly:

“And if there _was_ salt in it, sir, it wasn’t me. I never took the
salt near it.”

“What makes you think there was salt in it?” asked Poirot.

“Seeing it on the tray, sir.”

“You saw some salt on the tray?”

“Yes. Coarse kitchen salt, it looked. I never noticed it when I took
the tray up, but when I came to take it into the mistress’s room I saw
it at once, and I suppose I ought to have taken it down again, and
asked cook to make some fresh. But I was in a hurry, because Dorcas was
out, and I thought maybe the cocoa itself was all right, and the salt
had only gone on the tray. So I dusted it off with my apron, and took
it in.”

I had the utmost difficulty in controlling my excitement. Unknown to
herself, Annie had provided us with an important piece of evidence. How
she would have gaped if she had realized that her “coarse kitchen salt”
was strychnine, one of the most deadly poisons known to mankind. I
marvelled at Poirot’s calm. His self-control was astonishing. I awaited
his next question with impatience, but it disappointed me.

“When you went into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room, was the door leading into
Miss Cynthia’s room bolted?”

“Oh! Yes, sir; it always was. It had never been opened.”

“And the door into Mr. Inglethorp’s room? Did you notice if that was
bolted too?”

Annie hesitated.

“I couldn’t rightly say, sir; it was shut but I couldn’t say whether it
was bolted or not.”

“When you finally left the room, did Mrs. Inglethorp bolt the door
after you?”

“No, sir, not then, but I expect she did later. She usually did lock it
at night. The door into the passage, that is.”

“Did you notice any candle grease on the floor when you did the room
yesterday?”

“Candle grease? Oh, no, sir. Mrs. Inglethorp didn’t have a candle, only
a reading-lamp.”

“Then, if there had been a large patch of candle grease on the floor,
you think you would have been sure to have seen it?”

“Yes, sir, and I would have taken it out with a piece of blotting-paper
and a hot iron.”

Then Poirot repeated the question he had put to Dorcas:

“Did your mistress ever have a green dress?”

“No, sir.”

“Nor a mantle, nor a cape, nor a—how do you call it?—a sports coat?”

“Not green, sir.”

“Nor anyone else in the house?”

Annie reflected.

“No, sir.”

“You are sure of that?”

“Quite sure.”

“_Bien!_ That is all I want to know. Thank you very much.”

With a nervous giggle, Annie took herself creakingly out of the room.
My pent-up excitement burst forth.

“Poirot,” I cried, “I congratulate you! This is a great discovery.”

“What is a great discovery?”

“Why, that it was the cocoa and not the coffee that was poisoned. That
explains everything! Of course it did not take effect until the early
morning, since the cocoa was only drunk in the middle of the night.”

“So you think that the cocoa—mark well what I say, Hastings, the
_cocoa_—contained strychnine?”

“Of course! That salt on the tray, what else could it have been?”

“It might have been salt,” replied Poirot placidly.

I shrugged my shoulders. If he was going to take the matter that way,
it was no good arguing with him. The idea crossed my mind, not for the
first time, that poor old Poirot was growing old. Privately I thought
it lucky that he had associated with him someone of a more receptive
type of mind.

Poirot was surveying me with quietly twinkling eyes.

“You are not pleased with me, _mon ami?_”

“My dear Poirot,” I said coldly, “it is not for me to dictate to you.
You have a right to your own opinion, just as I have to mine.”

“A most admirable sentiment,” remarked Poirot, rising briskly to his
feet. “Now I have finished with this room. By the way, whose is the
smaller desk in the corner?”

“Mr. Inglethorp’s.”

“Ah!” He tried the roll top tentatively. “Locked. But perhaps one of
Mrs. Inglethorp’s keys would open it.” He tried several, twisting and
turning them with a practiced hand, and finally uttering an ejaculation
of satisfaction. “_Voilà!_ It is not the key, but it will open it at a
pinch.” He slid back the roll top, and ran a rapid eye over the neatly
filed papers. To my surprise, he did not examine them, merely remarking
approvingly as he relocked the desk: “Decidedly, he is a man of method,
this Mr. Inglethorp!”

A “man of method” was, in Poirot’s estimation, the highest praise that
could be bestowed on any individual.

I felt that my friend was not what he had been as he rambled on
disconnectedly:

“There were no stamps in his desk, but there might have been, eh, _mon
ami?_ There might have been? Yes”—his eyes wandered round the
room—“this boudoir has nothing more to tell us. It did not yield much.
Only this.”

He pulled a crumpled envelope out of his pocket, and tossed it over to
me. It was rather a curious document. A plain, dirty looking old
envelope with a few words scrawled across it, apparently at random. The
following is a facsimile of it.




       04








CHAPTER V. “IT ISN’T STRYCHNINE, IS IT?”

“Where did you find this?” I asked Poirot, in lively curiosity.

“In the waste-paper basket. You recognise the handwriting?”

“Yes, it is Mrs. Inglethorp’s. But what does it mean?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“I cannot say—but it is suggestive.”

A wild idea flashed across me. Was it possible that Mrs. Inglethorp’s
mind was deranged? Had she some fantastic idea of demoniacal
possession? And, if that were so, was it not also possible that she
might have taken her own life?

I was about to expound these theories to Poirot, when his own words
distracted me.

“Come,” he said, “now to examine the coffee-cups!”

“My dear Poirot! What on earth is the good of that, now that we know
about the cocoa?”

“Oh, _là là!_ That miserable cocoa!” cried Poirot flippantly.

He laughed with apparent enjoyment, raising his arms to heaven in mock
despair, in what I could not but consider the worst possible taste.

“And, anyway,” I said, with increasing coldness, “as Mrs. Inglethorp
took her coffee upstairs with her, I do not see what you expect to
find, unless you consider it likely that we shall discover a packet of
strychnine on the coffee tray!”

Poirot was sobered at once.

“Come, come, my friend,” he said, slipping his arms through mine. “_Ne
vous fâchez pas!_ Allow me to interest myself in my coffee-cups, and I
will respect your cocoa. There! Is it a bargain?”

He was so quaintly humorous that I was forced to laugh; and we went
together to the drawing-room, where the coffee-cups and tray remained
undisturbed as we had left them.

Poirot made me recapitulate the scene of the night before, listening
very carefully, and verifying the position of the various cups.

“So Mrs. Cavendish stood by the tray—and poured out. Yes. Then she came
across to the window where you sat with Mademoiselle Cynthia. Yes. Here
are the three cups. And the cup on the mantelpiece, half drunk, that
would be Mr. Lawrence Cavendish’s. And the one on the tray?”

“John Cavendish’s. I saw him put it down there.”

“Good. One, two, three, four, five—but where, then, is the cup of Mr.
Inglethorp?”

“He does not take coffee.”

“Then all are accounted for. One moment, my friend.”

With infinite care, he took a drop or two from the grounds in each cup,
sealing them up in separate test tubes, tasting each in turn as he did
so. His physiognomy underwent a curious change. An expression gathered
there that I can only describe as half puzzled, and half relieved.

“_Bien!_” he said at last. “It is evident! I had an idea—but clearly I
was mistaken. Yes, altogether I was mistaken. Yet it is strange. But no
matter!”

And, with a characteristic shrug, he dismissed whatever it was that was
worrying him from his mind. I could have told him from the beginning
that this obsession of his over the coffee was bound to end in a blind
alley, but I restrained my tongue. After all, though he was old, Poirot
had been a great man in his day.

“Breakfast is ready,” said John Cavendish, coming in from the hall.
“You will breakfast with us, Monsieur Poirot?”

Poirot acquiesced. I observed John. Already he was almost restored to
his normal self. The shock of the events of the last night had upset
him temporarily, but his equable poise soon swung back to the normal.
He was a man of very little imagination, in sharp contrast with his
brother, who had, perhaps, too much.

Ever since the early hours of the morning, John had been hard at work,
sending telegrams—one of the first had gone to Evelyn Howard—writing
notices for the papers, and generally occupying himself with the
melancholy duties that a death entails.

“May I ask how things are proceeding?” he said. “Do your investigations
point to my mother having died a natural death—or—or must we prepare
ourselves for the worst?”

“I think, Mr. Cavendish,” said Poirot gravely, “that you would do well
not to buoy yourself up with any false hopes. Can you tell me the views
of the other members of the family?”

“My brother Lawrence is convinced that we are making a fuss over
nothing. He says that everything points to its being a simple case of
heart failure.”

“He does, does he? That is very interesting—very interesting,” murmured
Poirot softly. “And Mrs. Cavendish?”

A faint cloud passed over John’s face.

“I have not the least idea what my wife’s views on the subject are.”

The answer brought a momentary stiffness in its train. John broke the
rather awkward silence by saying with a slight effort:

“I told you, didn’t I, that Mr. Inglethorp has returned?”

Poirot bent his head.

“It’s an awkward position for all of us. Of course one has to treat him
as usual—but, hang it all, one’s gorge does rise at sitting down to eat
with a possible murderer!”

Poirot nodded sympathetically.

“I quite understand. It is a very difficult situation for you, Mr.
Cavendish. I would like to ask you one question. Mr. Inglethorp’s
reason for not returning last night was, I believe, that he had
forgotten the latch-key. Is not that so?”

“Yes.”

“I suppose you are quite sure that the latch-key _was_ forgotten—that
he did not take it after all?”

“I have no idea. I never thought of looking. We always keep it in the
hall drawer. I’ll go and see if it’s there now.”

Poirot held up his hand with a faint smile.

“No, no, Mr. Cavendish, it is too late now. I am certain that you would
find it. If Mr. Inglethorp did take it, he has had ample time to
replace it by now.”

“But do you think——”

“I think nothing. If anyone had chanced to look this morning before his
return, and seen it there, it would have been a valuable point in his
favour. That is all.”

John looked perplexed.

“Do not worry,” said Poirot smoothly. “I assure you that you need not
let it trouble you. Since you are so kind, let us go and have some
breakfast.”

Everyone was assembled in the dining-room. Under the circumstances, we
were naturally not a cheerful party. The reaction after a shock is
always trying, and I think we were all suffering from it. Decorum and
good breeding naturally enjoined that our demeanour should be much as
usual, yet I could not help wondering if this self-control were really
a matter of great difficulty. There were no red eyes, no signs of
secretly indulged grief. I felt that I was right in my opinion that
Dorcas was the person most affected by the personal side of the
tragedy.

I pass over Alfred Inglethorp, who acted the bereaved widower in a
manner that I felt to be disgusting in its hypocrisy. Did he know that
we suspected him, I wondered. Surely he could not be unaware of the
fact, conceal it as we would. Did he feel some secret stirring of fear,
or was he confident that his crime would go unpunished? Surely the
suspicion in the atmosphere must warn him that he was already a marked
man.

But did everyone suspect him? What about Mrs. Cavendish? I watched her
as she sat at the head of the table, graceful, composed, enigmatic. In
her soft grey frock, with white ruffles at the wrists falling over her
slender hands, she looked very beautiful. When she chose, however, her
face could be sphinx-like in its inscrutability. She was very silent,
hardly opening her lips, and yet in some queer way I felt that the
great strength of her personality was dominating us all.

And little Cynthia? Did she suspect? She looked very tired and ill, I
thought. The heaviness and languor of her manner were very marked. I
asked her if she were feeling ill, and she answered frankly:

“Yes, I’ve got the most beastly headache.”

“Have another cup of coffee, mademoiselle?” said Poirot solicitously.
“It will revive you. It is unparalleled for the _mal de tête_.” He
jumped up and took her cup.

“No sugar,” said Cynthia, watching him, as he picked up the
sugar-tongs.

“No sugar? You abandon it in the war-time, eh?”

“No, I never take it in coffee.”

“_Sacré!_” murmured Poirot to himself, as he brought back the
replenished cup.

Only I heard him, and glancing up curiously at the little man I saw
that his face was working with suppressed excitement, and his eyes were
as green as a cat’s. He had heard or seen something that had affected
him strongly—but what was it? I do not usually label myself as dense,
but I must confess that nothing out of the ordinary had attracted _my_
attention.

In another moment, the door opened and Dorcas appeared.

“Mr. Wells to see you, sir,” she said to John.

I remembered the name as being that of the lawyer to whom Mrs.
Inglethorp had written the night before.

John rose immediately.

“Show him into my study.” Then he turned to us. “My mother’s lawyer,”
he explained. And in a lower voice: “He is also Coroner—you understand.
Perhaps you would like to come with me?”

We acquiesced and followed him out of the room. John strode on ahead
and I took the opportunity of whispering to Poirot:

“There will be an inquest then?”

Poirot nodded absently. He seemed absorbed in thought; so much so that
my curiosity was aroused.

“What is it? You are not attending to what I say.”

“It is true, my friend. I am much worried.”
HAPTER II. THE 16TH AND 17TH OF JULY

I had arrived at Styles on the 5th of July. I come now to the events of
the 16th and 17th of that month. For the convenience of the reader I
will recapitulate the incidents of those days in as exact a manner as
possible. They were elicited subsequently at the trial by a process of
long and tedious cross-examinations.

I received a letter from Evelyn Howard a couple of days after her
departure, telling me she was working as a nurse at the big hospital in
Middlingham, a manufacturing town some fifteen miles away, and begging
me to let her know if Mrs. Inglethorp should show any wish to be
reconciled.

The only fly in the ointment of my peaceful days was Mrs. Cavendish’s
extraordinary, and, for my part, unaccountable preference for the
society of Dr. Bauerstein. What she saw in the man I cannot imagine,
but she was always asking him up to the house, and often went off for
long expeditions with him. I must confess that I was quite unable to
see his attraction.

The 16th of July fell on a Monday. It was a day of turmoil. The famous
bazaar had taken place on Saturday, and an entertainment, in connection
with the same charity, at which Mrs. Inglethorp was to recite a War
poem, was to be held that night. We were all busy during the morning
arranging and decorating the Hall in the village where it was to take
place. We had a late luncheon and spent the afternoon resting in the
garden. I noticed that John’s manner was somewhat unusual. He seemed
very excited and restless.

After tea, Mrs. Inglethorp went to lie down to rest before her efforts
in the evening and I challenged Mary Cavendish to a single at tennis.

About a quarter to seven, Mrs. Inglethorp called us that we should be
late as supper was early that night. We had rather a scramble to get
ready in time; and before the meal was over the motor was waiting at
the door.

The entertainment was a great success, Mrs. Inglethorp’s recitation
receiving tremendous applause. There were also some tableaux in which
Cynthia took part. She did not return with us, having been asked to a
supper party, and to remain the night with some friends who had been
acting with her in the tableaux.

The following morning, Mrs. Inglethorp stayed in bed to breakfast, as
she was rather overtired; but she appeared in her briskest mood about
12.30, and swept Lawrence and myself off to a luncheon party.

“Such a charming invitation from Mrs. Rolleston. Lady Tadminster’s
sister, you know. The Rollestons came over with the Conqueror—one of
our oldest families.”

Mary had excused herself on the plea of an engagement with Dr.
Bauerstein.

We had a pleasant luncheon, and as we drove away Lawrence suggested
that we should return by Tadminster, which was barely a mile out of our
way, and pay a visit to Cynthia in her dispensary. Mrs. Inglethorp
replied that this was an excellent idea, but as she had several letters
to write she would drop us there, and we could come back with Cynthia
in the pony-trap.

We were detained under suspicion by the hospital porter, until Cynthia
appeared to vouch for us, looking very cool and sweet in her long white
overall. She took us up to her sanctum, and introduced us to her fellow
dispenser, a rather awe-inspiring individual, whom Cynthia cheerily
addressed as “Nibs.”

“What a lot of bottles!” I exclaimed, as my eye travelled round the
small room. “Do you really know what’s in them all?”

“Say something original,” groaned Cynthia. “Every single person who
comes up here says that. We are really thinking of bestowing a prize on
the first individual who does _not_ say: ‘What a lot of bottles!’ And I
know the next thing you’re going to say is: ‘How many people have you
poisoned?’”

I pleaded guilty with a laugh.

“If you people only knew how fatally easy it is to poison someone by
mistake, you wouldn’t joke about it. Come on, let’s have tea. We’ve got
all sorts of secret stories in that cupboard. No, Lawrence—that’s the
poison cupboard. The big cupboard—that’s right.”

We had a very cheery tea, and assisted Cynthia to wash up afterwards.
We had just put away the last tea-spoon when a knock came at the door.
The countenances of Cynthia and Nibs were suddenly petrified into a
stern and forbidding expression.

“Come in,” said Cynthia, in a sharp professional tone.

A young and rather scared looking nurse appeared with a bottle which
she proffered to Nibs, who waved her towards Cynthia with the somewhat
enigmatical remark:

“_I_’m not really here to-day.”

Cynthia took the bottle and examined it with the severity of a judge.

“This should have been sent up this morning.”

“Sister is very sorry. She forgot.”

“Sister should read the rules outside the door.”

I gathered from the little nurse’s expression that there was not the
least likelihood of her having the hardihood to retail this message to
the dreaded “Sister”.

“So now it can’t be done until to-morrow,” finished Cynthia.

“Don’t you think you could possibly let us have it to-night?”

“Well,” said Cynthia graciously, “we are very busy, but if we have time
it shall be done.”

The little nurse withdrew, and Cynthia promptly took a jar from the
shelf, refilled the bottle, and placed it on the table outside the
door.

I laughed.

“Discipline must be maintained?”

“Exactly. Come out on our little balcony. You can see all the outside
wards there.”

I followed Cynthia and her friend and they pointed out the different
wards to me. Lawrence remained behind, but after a few moments Cynthia
called to him over her shoulder to come and join us. Then she looked at
her watch.

“Nothing more to do, Nibs?”

“No.”

“All right. Then we can lock up and go.”

I had seen Lawrence in quite a different light that afternoon. Compared
to John, he was an astoundingly difficult person to get to know. He was
the opposite of his brother in almost every respect, being unusually
shy and reserved. Yet he had a certain charm of manner, and I fancied
that, if one really knew him well, one could have a deep affection for
him. I had always fancied that his manner to Cynthia was rather
constrained, and that she on her side was inclined to be shy of him.
But they were both gay enough this afternoon, and chatted together like
a couple of children.

As we drove through the village, I remembered that I wanted some
stamps, so accordingly we pulled up at the post office.

As I came out again, I cannoned into a little man who was just
entering. I drew aside and apologised, when suddenly, with a loud
exclamation, he clasped me in his arms and kissed me warmly.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings!” he cried. “It is indeed _mon ami_ Hastings!”

“Poirot!” I exclaimed.

I turned to the pony-trap.

“This is a very pleasant meeting for me, Miss Cynthia. This is my old
friend, Monsieur Poirot, whom I have not seen for years.”

“Oh, we know Monsieur Poirot,” said Cynthia gaily. “But I had no idea
he was a friend of yours.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Poirot seriously. “I know Mademoiselle Cynthia. It
is by the charity of that good Mrs. Inglethorp that I am here.” Then,
as I looked at him inquiringly: “Yes, my friend, she had kindly
extended hospitality to seven of my countrypeople who, alas, are
refugees from their native land. We Belgians will always remember her
with gratitude.”

Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more than
five feet, four inches, but carried himself with great dignity. His
head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little
on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. The neatness of
his attire was almost incredible. I believe a speck of dust would have
caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandified
little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his
time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police. As a
detective, his _flair_ had been extraordinary, and he had achieved
triumphs by unravelling some of the most baffling cases of the day.

He pointed out to me the little house inhabited by him and his fellow
Belgians, and I promised to go and see him at an early date. Then he
raised his hat with a flourish to Cynthia, and we drove away.

“He’s a dear little man,” said Cynthia. “I’d no idea you knew him.”

“You’ve been entertaining a celebrity unawares,” I replied.

And, for the rest of the way home, I recited to them the various
exploits and triumphs of Hercule Poirot.

We arrived back in a very cheerful mood. As we entered the hall, Mrs.
Inglethorp came out of her boudoir. She looked flushed and upset.

“Oh, it’s you,” she said.

“Is there anything the matter, Aunt Emily?” asked Cynthia.

“Certainly not,” said Mrs. Inglethorp sharply. “What should there be?”
Then catching sight of Dorcas, the parlourmaid, going into the
dining-room, she called to her to bring some stamps into the boudoir.

“Yes, m’m.” The old servant hesitated, then added diffidently: “Don’t
you think, m’m, you’d better get to bed? You’re looking very tired.”

“Perhaps you’re right, Dorcas—yes—no—not now. I’ve some letters I must
finish by post-time. Have you lighted the fire in my room as I told
you?”

“Yes, m’m.”

“Then I’ll go to bed directly after supper.”

She went into the boudoir again, and Cynthia stared after her.

“Goodness gracious! I wonder what’s up?” she said to Lawrence.

He did not seem to have heard her, for without a word he turned on his
heel and went out of the house.

I suggested a quick game of tennis before supper and, Cynthia agreeing,
I ran upstairs to fetch my racquet.

Mrs. Cavendish was coming down the stairs. It may have been my fancy,
but she, too, was looking odd and disturbed.

“Had a good walk with Dr. Bauerstein?” I asked, trying to appear as
indifferent as I could.

“I didn’t go,” she replied abruptly. “Where is Mrs. Inglethorp?”

“In the boudoir.”

Her hand clenched itself on the banisters, then she seemed to nerve
herself for some encounter, and went rapidly past me down the stairs
across the hall to the boudoir, the door of which she shut behind her.

As I ran out to the tennis court a few moments later, I had to pass the
open boudoir window, and was unable to help overhearing the following
scrap of dialogue. Mary Cavendish was saying in the voice of a woman
desperately controlling herself:

“Then you won’t show it to me?”

To which Mrs. Inglethorp replied:

“My dear Mary, it has nothing to do with that matter.”

“Then show it to me.”

“I tell you it is not what you imagine. It does not concern you in the
least.”

To which Mary Cavendish replied, with a rising bitterness:

“Of course, I might have known you would shield him.”

Cynthia was waiting for me, and greeted me eagerly with:

“I say! There’s been the most awful row! I’ve got it all out of
Dorcas.”

“What kind of a row?”

“Between Aunt Emily and _him_. I do hope she’s found him out at last!”

“Was Dorcas there, then?”

“Of course not. She ‘happened to be near the door’. It was a real old
bust-up. I do wish I knew what it was all about.”

I thought of Mrs. Raikes’s gipsy face, and Evelyn Howard’s warnings,
but wisely decided to hold my peace, whilst Cynthia exhausted every
possible hypothesis, and cheerfully hoped, “Aunt Emily will send him
away, and will never speak to him again.”

I was anxious to get hold of John, but he was nowhere to be seen.
Evidently something very momentous had occurred that afternoon. I tried
to forget the few words I had overheard; but, do what I would, I could
not dismiss them altogether from my mind. What was Mary Cavendish’s
concern in the matter?

Mr. Inglethorp was in the drawing-room when I came down to supper. His
face was impassive as ever, and the strange unreality of the man struck
me afresh.

Mrs. Inglethorp came down last. She still looked agitated, and during
the meal there was a somewhat constrained silence. Inglethorp was
unusually quiet. As a rule, he surrounded his wife with little
attentions, placing a cushion at her back, and altogether playing the
part of the devoted husband. Immediately after supper, Mrs. Inglethorp
retired to her boudoir again.

“Send my coffee in here, Mary,” she called. “I’ve just five minutes to
catch the post.”

Cynthia and I went and sat by the open window in the drawing-room. Mary
Cavendish brought our coffee to us. She seemed excited.

“Do you young people want lights, or do you enjoy the twilight?” she
asked. “Will you take Mrs. Inglethorp her coffee, Cynthia? I will pour
it out.”

“Do not trouble, Mary,” said Inglethorp. “I will take it to Emily.” He
poured it out, and went out of the room carrying it carefully.

Lawrence followed him, and Mrs. Cavendish sat down by us.

We three sat for some time in silence. It was a glorious night, hot and
still. Mrs. Cavendish fanned herself gently with a palm leaf.

“It’s almost too hot,” she murmured. “We shall have a thunderstorm.”

Alas, that these harmonious moments can never endure! My paradise was
rudely shattered by the sound of a well known, and heartily disliked,
voice in the hall.

“Dr. Bauerstein!” exclaimed Cynthia. “What a funny time to come.”

I glanced jealously at Mary Cavendish, but she seemed quite
undisturbed, the delicate pallor of her cheeks did not vary.

In a few moments, Alfred Inglethorp had ushered the doctor in, the
latter laughing, and protesting that he was in no fit state for a
drawing-room. In truth, he presented a sorry spectacle, being literally
plastered with mud.

“What have you been doing, doctor?” cried Mrs. Cavendish.

“I must make my apologies,” said the doctor. “I did not really mean to
come in, but Mr. Inglethorp insisted.”

“Well, Bauerstein, you are in a plight,” said John, strolling in from
the hall. “Have some coffee, and tell us what you have been up to.”

“Thank you, I will.” He laughed rather ruefully, as he described how he
had discovered a very rare species of fern in an inaccessible place,
and in his efforts to obtain it had lost his footing, and slipped
ignominiously into a neighbouring pond.

“The sun soon dried me off,” he added, “but I’m afraid my appearance is
very disreputable.”

At this juncture, Mrs. Inglethorp called to Cynthia from the hall, and
the girl ran out.

“Just carry up my despatch-case, will you, dear? I’m going to bed.”

The door into the hall was a wide one. I had risen when Cynthia did,
John was close by me. There were therefore three witnesses who could
swear that Mrs. Inglethorp was carrying her coffee, as yet untasted, in
her hand.

My evening was utterly and entirely spoilt by the presence of Dr.
Bauerstein. It seemed to me the man would never go. He rose at last,
however, and I breathed a sigh of relief.

“I’ll walk down to the village with you,” said Mr. Inglethorp. “I must
see our agent over those estate accounts.” He turned to John. “No one
need sit up. I will take the latch-key.”






CHAPTER III. THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDY

To make this part of my story clear, I append the following plan of the
first floor of Styles. The servants’ rooms are reached through the door
B. They have no communication with the right wing, where the
Inglethorps’ rooms were situated.




       01



It seemed to be the middle of the night when I was awakened by Lawrence
Cavendish. He had a candle in his hand, and the agitation of his face
told me at once that something was seriously wrong.

“What’s the matter?” I asked, sitting up in bed, and trying to collect
my scattered thoughts.

“We are afraid my mother is very ill. She seems to be having some kind
of fit. Unfortunately she has locked herself in.”

“I’ll come at once.”

I sprang out of bed; and, pulling on a dressing-gown, followed Lawrence
along the passage and the gallery to the right wing of the house.

John Cavendish joined us, and one or two of the servants were standing
round in a state of awe-stricken excitement. Lawrence turned to his
brother.

“What do you think we had better do?”

Never, I thought, had his indecision of character been more apparent.

John rattled the handle of Mrs. Inglethorp’s door violently, but with
no effect. It was obviously locked or bolted on the inside. The whole
household was aroused by now. The most alarming sounds were audible
from the interior of the room. Clearly something must be done.

“Try going through Mr. Inglethorp’s room, sir,” cried Dorcas. “Oh, the
poor mistress!”

Suddenly I realized that Alfred Inglethorp was not with us—that he
alone had given no sign of his presence. John opened the door of his
room. It was pitch dark, but Lawrence was following with the candle,
and by its feeble light we saw that the bed had not been slept in, and
that there was no sign of the room having been occupied.

We went straight to the connecting door. That, too, was locked or
bolted on the inside. What was to be done?

“Oh, dear, sir,” cried Dorcas, wringing her hands, “what ever shall we
do?”

“We must try and break the door in, I suppose. It’ll be a tough job,
though. Here, let one of the maids go down and wake Baily and tell him
to go for Dr. Wilkins at once. Now then, we’ll have a try at the door.
Half a moment, though, isn’t there a door into Miss Cynthia’s rooms?”

“Yes, sir, but that’s always bolted. It’s never been undone.”

“Well, we might just see.”

He ran rapidly down the corridor to Cynthia’s room. Mary Cavendish was
there, shaking the girl—who must have been an unusually sound
sleeper—and trying to wake her.

In a moment or two he was back.

“No good. That’s bolted too. We must break in the door. I think this
one is a shade less solid than the one in the passage.”

We strained and heaved together. The framework of the door was solid,
and for a long time it resisted our efforts, but at last we felt it
give beneath our weight, and finally, with a resounding crash, it was
burst open.

We stumbled in together, Lawrence still holding his candle. Mrs.
Inglethorp was lying on the bed, her whole form agitated by violent
convulsions, in one of which she must have overturned the table beside
her. As we entered, however, her limbs relaxed, and she fell back upon
the pillows.

John strode across the room, and lit the gas. Turning to Annie, one of
the housemaids, he sent her downstairs to the dining-room for brandy.
Then he went across to his mother whilst I unbolted the door that gave
on the corridor.

I turned to Lawrence, to suggest that I had better leave them now that
there was no further need of my services, but the words were frozen on
my lips. Never have I seen such a ghastly look on any man’s face. He
was white as chalk, the candle he held in his shaking hand was
sputtering onto the carpet, and his eyes, petrified with terror, or
some such kindred emotion, stared fixedly over my head at a point on
the further wall. It was as though he had seen something that turned
him to stone. I instinctively followed the direction of his eyes, but I
could see nothing unusual. The still feebly flickering ashes in the
grate, and the row of prim ornaments on the mantelpiece, were surely
harmless enough.

The violence of Mrs. Inglethorp’s attack seemed to be passing. She was
able to speak in short gasps.

“Better now—very sudden—stupid of me—to lock myself in.”

A shadow fell on the bed and, looking up, I saw Mary Cavendish standing
near the door with her arm around Cynthia. She seemed to be supporting
the girl, who looked utterly dazed and unlike herself. Her face was
heavily flushed, and she yawned repeatedly.

“Poor Cynthia is quite frightened,” said Mrs. Cavendish in a low clear
voice. She herself, I noticed, was dressed in her white land smock.
Then it must be later than I thought. I saw that a faint streak of
daylight was showing through the curtains of the windows, and that the
clock on the mantelpiece pointed to close upon five o’clock.

A strangled cry from the bed startled me. A fresh access of pain seized
the unfortunate old lady. The convulsions were of a violence terrible
to behold. Everything was confusion. We thronged round her, powerless
to help or alleviate. A final convulsion lifted her from the bed, until
she appeared to rest upon her head and her heels, with her body arched
in an extraordinary manner. In vain Mary and John tried to administer
more brandy. The moments flew. Again the body arched itself in that
peculiar fashion.

At that moment, Dr. Bauerstein pushed his way authoritatively into the
room. For one instant he stopped dead, staring at the figure on the
bed, and, at the same instant, Mrs. Inglethorp cried out in a strangled
voice, her eyes fixed on the doctor:

“Alfred—Alfred——” Then she fell back motionless on the pillows.

With a stride, the doctor reached the bed, and seizing her arms worked
them energetically, applying what I knew to be artificial respiration.
He issued a few short sharp orders to the servants. An imperious wave
of his hand drove us all to the door. We watched him, fascinated,
though I think we all knew in our hearts that it was too late, and that
nothing could be done now. I could see by the expression on his face
that he himself had little hope.

Finally he abandoned his task, shaking his head gravely. At that
moment, we heard footsteps outside, and Dr. Wilkins, Mrs. Inglethorp’s
own doctor, a portly, fussy little man, came bustling in.

In a few words Dr. Bauerstein explained how he had happened to be
passing the lodge gates as the car came out, and had run up to the
house as fast as he could, whilst the car went on to fetch Dr. Wilkins.
With a faint gesture of the hand, he indicated the figure on the bed.

“Ve—ry sad. Ve—ry sad,” murmured Dr. Wilkins. “Poor dear lady. Always
did far too much—far too much—against my advice. I warned her. Her
heart was far from strong. ‘Take it easy,’ I said to her,
‘Take—it—easy’. But no—her zeal for good works was too great. Nature
rebelled. Na—ture—re—belled.”

Dr. Bauerstein, I noticed, was watching the local doctor narrowly. He
still kept his eyes fixed on him as he spoke.

“The convulsions were of a peculiar violence, Dr. Wilkins. I am sorry
you were not here in time to witness them. They were quite—tetanic in
character.”

“Ah!” said Dr. Wilkins wisely.

“I should like to speak to you in private,” said Dr. Bauerstein. He
turned to John. “You do not object?”

“Certainly not.”

We all trooped out into the corridor, leaving the two doctors alone,
and I heard the key turned in the lock behind us.

We went slowly down the stairs. I was violently excited. I have a
certain talent for deduction, and Dr. Bauerstein’s manner had started a
flock of wild surmises in my mind. Mary Cavendish laid her hand upon my
arm.

“What is it? Why did Dr. Bauerstein seem so—peculiar?”

I looked at her.

“Do you know what I think?”

“What?”

“Listen!” I looked round, the others were out of earshot. I lowered my
voice to a whisper. “I believe she has been poisoned! I’m certain Dr.
Bauerstein suspects it.”

“_What?_” She shrank against the wall, the pupils of her eyes dilating
wildly. Then, with a sudden cry that startled me, she cried out: “No,
no—not that—not that!” And breaking from me, fled up the stairs. I
followed her, afraid that she was going to faint. I found her leaning
against the bannisters, deadly pale. She waved me away impatiently.

“No, no—leave me. I’d rather be alone. Let me just be quiet for a
minute or two. Go down to the others.”

I obeyed her reluctantly. John and Lawrence were in the dining-room. I
joined them. We were all silent, but I suppose I voiced the thoughts of
us all when I at last broke it by saying:

“Where is Mr. Inglethorp?”

John shook his head.

“He’s not in the house.”

Our eyes met. Where _was_ Alfred Inglethorp? His absence was strange
and inexplicable. I remembered Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words. What lay
beneath them? What more could she have told us, if she had had time?

At last we heard the doctors descending the stairs. Dr. Wilkins was
looking important and excited, and trying to conceal an inward
exultation under a manner of decorous calm. Dr. Bauerstein remained in
the background, his grave bearded face unchanged. Dr. Wilkins was the
spokesman for the two. He addressed himself to John:

“Mr. Cavendish, I should like your consent to a post-mortem.”

“Is that necessary?” asked John gravely. A spasm of pain crossed his
face.

“Absolutely,” said Dr. Bauerstein.

“You mean by that——?”

“That neither Dr. Wilkins nor myself could give a death certificate
under the circumstances.”

John bent his head.

“In that case, I have no alternative but to agree.”

“Thank you,” said Dr. Wilkins briskly. “We propose that it should take
place to-morrow night—or rather to-night.” And he glanced at the
daylight. “Under the circumstances, I am afraid an inquest can hardly
be avoided—these formalities are necessary, but I beg that you won’t
distress yourselves.”

There was a pause, and then Dr. Bauerstein drew two keys from his
pocket, and handed them to John.

“These are the keys of the two rooms. I have locked them and, in my
opinion, they would be better kept locked for the present.”

The doctors then departed.

I had been turning over an idea in my head, and I felt that the moment
had now come to broach it. Yet I was a little chary of doing so. John,
I knew, had a horror of any kind of publicity, and was an easygoing
optimist, who preferred never to meet trouble half-way. It might be
difficult to convince him of the soundness of my plan. Lawrence, on the
other hand, being less conventional, and having more imagination, I
felt I might count upon as an ally. There was no doubt that the moment
had come for me to take the lead.

“John,” I said, “I am going to ask you something.”

“Well?”

“You remember my speaking of my friend Poirot? The Belgian who is here?
He has been a most famous detective.”

“Yes.”

“I want you to let me call him in—to investigate this matter.”

“What—now? Before the post-mortem?”

“Yes, time is an advantage if—if—there has been foul play.”

“Rubbish!” cried Lawrence angrily. “In my opinion the whole thing is a
mare’s nest of Bauerstein’s! Wilkins hadn’t an idea of such a thing,
until Bauerstein put it into his head. But, like all specialists,
Bauerstein’s got a bee in his bonnet. Poisons are his hobby, so of
course he sees them everywhere.”

I confess that I was surprised by Lawrence’s attitude. He was so seldom
vehement about anything.

John hesitated.

“I can’t feel as you do, Lawrence,” he said at last. “I’m inclined to
give Hastings a free hand, though I should prefer to wait a bit. We
don’t want any unnecessary scandal.”

“No, no,” I cried eagerly, “you need have no fear of that. Poirot is
discretion itself.”

“Very well, then, have it your own way. I leave it in your hands.
Though, if it is as we suspect, it seems a clear enough case. God
forgive me if I am wronging him!”

I looked at my watch. It was six o’clock. I determined to lose no time.

Five minutes’ delay, however, I allowed myself. I spent it in
ransacking the library until I discovered a medical book which gave a
description of strychnine poisoning.






CHAPTER IV. POIROT INVESTIGATES

The house which the Belgians occupied in the village was quite close to
the park gates. One could save time by taking a narrow path through the
long grass, which cut off the detours of the winding drive. So I,
accordingly, went that way. I had nearly reached the lodge, when my
attention was arrested by the running figure of a man approaching me.
It was Mr. Inglethorp. Where had he been? How did he intend to explain
his absence?

He accosted me eagerly.

“My God! This is terrible! My poor wife! I have only just heard.”

“Where have you been?” I asked.

“Denby kept me late last night. It was one o’clock before we’d
finished. Then I found that I’d forgotten the latch-key after all. I
didn’t want to arouse the household, so Denby gave me a bed.”

“How did you hear the news?” I asked.

“Wilkins knocked Denby up to tell him. My poor Emily! She was so
self-sacrificing—such a noble character. She over-taxed her strength.”

A wave of revulsion swept over me. What a consummate hypocrite the man
was!

“I must hurry on,” I said, thankful that he did not ask me whither I
was bound.

In a few minutes I was knocking at the door of Leastways Cottage.

Getting no answer, I repeated my summons impatiently. A window above me
was cautiously opened, and Poirot himself looked out.

He gave an exclamation of surprise at seeing me. In a few brief words,
I explained the tragedy that had occurred, and that I wanted his help.

“Wait, my friend, I will let you in, and you shall recount to me the
affair whilst I dress.”

In a few moments he had unbarred the door, and I followed him up to his
room. There he installed me in a chair, and I related the whole story,
keeping back nothing, and omitting no circumstance, however
insignificant, whilst he himself made a careful and deliberate toilet.

I told him of my awakening, of Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words, of her
husband’s absence, of the quarrel the day before, of the scrap of
conversation between Mary and her mother-in-law that I had overheard,
of the former quarrel between Mrs. Inglethorp and Evelyn Howard, and of
the latter’s innuendoes.

I was hardly as clear as I could wish. I repeated myself several times,
and occasionally had to go back to some detail that I had forgotten.
Poirot smiled kindly on me.

“The mind is confused? Is it not so? Take time, _mon ami_. You are
agitated; you are excited—it is but natural. Presently, when we are
calmer, we will arrange the facts, neatly, each in his proper place. We
will examine—and reject. Those of importance we will put on one side;
those of no importance, pouf!”—he screwed up his cherub-like face, and
puffed comically enough—“blow them away!”

“That’s all very well,” I objected, “but how are you going to decide
what is important, and what isn’t? That always seems the difficulty to
me.”

Poirot shook his head energetically. He was now arranging his moustache
with exquisite care.

“Not so. _Voyons!_ One fact leads to another—so we continue. Does the
next fit in with that? _A merveille!_ Good! We can proceed. This next
little fact—no! Ah, that is curious! There is something missing—a link
in the chain that is not there. We examine. We search. And that little
curious fact, that possibly paltry little detail that will not tally,
we put it here!” He made an extravagant gesture with his hand. “It is
significant! It is tremendous!”

“Y—es——”

“Ah!” Poirot shook his forefinger so fiercely at me that I quailed
before it. “Beware! Peril to the detective who says: ‘It is so small—it
does not matter. It will not agree. I will forget it.’ That way lies
confusion! Everything matters.”

“I know. You always told me that. That’s why I have gone into all the
details of this thing whether they seemed to me relevant or not.”

“And I am pleased with you. You have a good memory, and you have given
me the facts faithfully. Of the order in which you present them, I say
nothing—truly, it is deplorable! But I make allowances—you are upset.
To that I attribute the circumstance that you have omitted one fact of
paramount importance.”

“What is that?” I asked.

“You have not told me if Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night.”

I stared at him. Surely the war had affected the little man’s brain. He
was carefully engaged in brushing his coat before putting it on, and
seemed wholly engrossed in the task.

“I don’t remember,” I said. “And, anyway, I don’t see——”

“You do not see? But it is of the first importance.”

“I can’t see why,” I said, rather nettled. “As far as I can remember,
she didn’t eat much. She was obviously upset, and it had taken her
appetite away. That was only natural.”

“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “it was only natural.”

He opened a drawer, and took out a small despatch-case, then turned to
me.

“Now I am ready. We will proceed to the château, and study matters on
the spot. Excuse me, _mon ami_, you dressed in haste, and your tie is
on one side. Permit me.” With a deft gesture, he rearranged it.

“_Ça y est!_ Now, shall we start?”

We hurried up the village, and turned in at the lodge gates. Poirot
stopped for a moment, and gazed sorrowfully over the beautiful expanse
of park, still glittering with morning dew.

“So beautiful, so beautiful, and yet, the poor family, plunged in
sorrow, prostrated with grief.”

He looked at me keenly as he spoke, and I was aware that I reddened
under his prolonged gaze.

Was the family prostrated by grief? Was the sorrow at Mrs. Inglethorp’s
death so great? I realized that there was an emotional lack in the
atmosphere. The dead woman had not the gift of commanding love. Her
death was a shock and a distress, but she would not be passionately
regretted.

Poirot seemed to follow my thoughts. He nodded his head gravely.

“No, you are right,” he said, “it is not as though there was a blood
tie. She has been kind and generous to these Cavendishes, but she was
not their own mother. Blood tells—always remember that—blood tells.”

“Poirot,” I said, “I wish you would tell me why you wanted to know if
Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night? I have been turning it over in my
mind, but I can’t see how it has anything to do with the matter?”

He was silent for a minute or two as we walked along, but finally he
said:

“I do not mind telling you—though, as you know, it is not my habit to
explain until the end is reached. The present contention is that Mrs.
Inglethorp died of strychnine poisoning, presumably administered in her
coffee.”

“Yes?”

“Well, what time was the coffee served?”

“About eight o’clock.”

“Therefore she drank it between then and half-past eight—certainly not
much later. Well, strychnine is a fairly rapid poison. Its effects
would be felt very soon, probably in about an hour. Yet, in Mrs.
Inglethorp’s case, the symptoms do not manifest themselves until five
o’clock the next morning: nine hours! But a heavy meal, taken at about
the same time as the poison, might retard its effects, though hardly to
that extent. Still, it is a possibility to be taken into account. But,
according to you, she ate very little for supper, and yet the symptoms
do not develop until early the next morning! Now that is a curious
circumstance, my friend. Something may arise at the autopsy to explain
it. In the meantime, remember it.”

As we neared the house, John came out and met us. His face looked weary
and haggard.

“This is a very dreadful business, Monsieur Poirot,” he said. “Hastings
has explained to you that we are anxious for no publicity?”

“I comprehend perfectly.”

“You see, it is only suspicion so far. We have nothing to go upon.”

“Precisely. It is a matter of precaution only.”

John turned to me, taking out his cigarette-case, and lighting a
cigarette as he did so.

“You know that fellow Inglethorp is back?”

“Yes. I met him.”

John flung the match into an adjacent flower bed, a proceeding which
was too much for Poirot’s feelings. He retrieved it, and buried it
neatly.

“It’s jolly difficult to know how to treat him.”

“That difficulty will not exist long,” pronounced Poirot quietly.

John looked puzzled, not quite understanding the portent of this
cryptic saying. He handed the two keys which Dr. Bauerstein had given
him to me.

“Show Monsieur Poirot everything he wants to see.”

“The rooms are locked?” asked Poirot.

“Dr. Bauerstein considered it advisable.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“Then he is very sure. Well, that simplifies matters for us.”

We went up together to the room of the tragedy. For convenience I
append a plan of the room and the principal articles of furniture in
it.




       02



Poirot locked the door on the inside, and proceeded to a minute
inspection of the room. He darted from one object to the other with the
agility of a grasshopper. I remained by the door, fearing to obliterate
any clues. Poirot, however, did not seem grateful to me for my
forbearance.

“What have you, my friend,” he cried, “that you remain there like—how
do you say it?—ah, yes, the stuck pig?”

I explained that I was afraid of obliterating any foot-marks.

“Foot-marks? But what an idea! There has already been practically an
army in the room! What foot-marks are we likely to find? No, come here
and aid me in my search. I will put down my little case until I need
it.”

He did so, on the round table by the window, but it was an ill-advised
proceeding; for, the top of it being loose, it tilted up, and
precipitated the despatch-case on the floor.

“_Eh voilà une table!_” cried Poirot. “Ah, my friend, one may live in a
big house and yet have no comfort.”

After which piece of moralizing, he resumed his search.

A small purple despatch-case, with a key in the lock, on the
writing-table, engaged his attention for some time. He took out the key
from the lock, and passed it to me to inspect. I saw nothing peculiar,
however. It was an ordinary key of the Yale type, with a bit of twisted
wire through the handle.

Next, he examined the framework of the door we had broken in, assuring
himself that the bolt had really been shot. Then he went to the door
opposite leading into Cynthia’s room. That door was also bolted, as I
had stated. However, he went to the length of unbolting it, and opening
and shutting it several times; this he did with the utmost precaution
against making any noise. Suddenly something in the bolt itself seemed
to rivet his attention. He examined it carefully, and then, nimbly
whipping out a pair of small forceps from his case, he drew out some
minute particle which he carefully sealed up in a tiny envelope.

On the chest of drawers there was a tray with a spirit lamp and a small
saucepan on it. A small quantity of a dark fluid remained in the
saucepan, and an empty cup and saucer that had been drunk out of stood
near it.

I wondered how I could have been so unobservant as to overlook this.
Here was a clue worth having. Poirot delicately dipped his finger into
liquid, and tasted it gingerly. He made a grimace.

“Cocoa—with—I think—rum in it.”

He passed on to the debris on the floor, where the table by the bed had
been overturned. A reading-lamp, some books, matches, a bunch of keys,
and the crushed fragments of a coffee-cup lay scattered about.

“Ah, this is curious,” said Poirot.

“I must confess that I see nothing particularly curious about it.”

“You do not? Observe the lamp—the chimney is broken in two places; they
lie there as they fell. But see, the coffee-cup is absolutely smashed
to powder.”

“Well,” I said wearily, “I suppose someone must have stepped on it.”

“Exactly,” said Poirot, in an odd voice. “Someone stepped on it.”

He rose from his knees, and walked slowly across to the mantelpiece,
where he stood abstractedly fingering the ornaments, and straightening
them—a trick of his when he was agitated.

“_Mon ami_,” he said, turning to me, “somebody stepped on that cup,
grinding it to powder, and the reason they did so was either because it
contained strychnine or—which is far more serious—because it did not
contain strychnine!”

I made no reply. I was bewildered, but I knew that it was no good
asking him to explain. In a moment or two he roused himself, and went
on with his investigations. He picked up the bunch of keys from the
floor, and twirling them round in his fingers finally selected one,
very bright and shining, which he tried in the lock of the purple
despatch-case. It fitted, and he opened the box, but after a moment’s
hesitation, closed and relocked it, and slipped the bunch of keys, as
well as the key that had originally stood in the lock, into his own
pocket.

“I have no authority to go through these papers. But it should be
done—at once!”

He then made a very careful examination of the drawers of the
wash-stand. Crossing the room to the left-hand window, a round stain,
hardly visible on the dark brown carpet, seemed to interest him
particularly. He went down on his knees, examining it minutely—even
going so far as to smell it.

Finally, he poured a few drops of the cocoa into a test tube, sealing
it up carefully. His next proceeding was to take out a little notebook.

“We have found in this room,” he said, writing busily, “six points of
interest. Shall I enumerate them, or will you?”

“Oh, you,” I replied hastily.

“Very well, then. One, a coffee-cup that has been ground into powder;
two, a despatch-case with a key in the lock; three, a stain on the
floor.”

“That may have been done some time ago,” I interrupted.

“No, for it is still perceptibly damp and smells of coffee. Four, a
fragment of some dark green fabric—only a thread or two, but
recognizable.”

“Ah!” I cried. “That was what you sealed up in the envelope.”

“Yes. It may turn out to be a piece of one of Mrs. Inglethorp’s own
dresses, and quite unimportant. We shall see. Five, _this_!” With a
dramatic gesture, he pointed to a large splash of candle grease on the
floor by the writing-table. “It must have been done since yesterday,
otherwise a good housemaid would have at once removed it with
blotting-paper and a hot iron. One of my best hats once—but that is not
to the point.”

“It was very likely done last night. We were very agitated. Or perhaps
Mrs. Inglethorp herself dropped her candle.”

“You brought only one candle into the room?”

“Yes. Lawrence Cavendish was carrying it. But he was very upset. He
seemed to see something over here”—I indicated the mantelpiece—“that
absolutely paralysed him.”

“That is interesting,” said Poirot quickly. “Yes, it is suggestive”—his
eye sweeping the whole length of the wall—“but it was not his candle
that made this great patch, for you perceive that this is white grease;
whereas Monsieur Lawrence’s candle, which is still on the
dressing-table, is pink. On the other hand, Mrs. Inglethorp had no
candlestick in the room, only a reading-lamp.”

“Then,” I said, “what do you deduce?”

To which my friend only made a rather irritating reply, urging me to
use my own natural faculties.

“And the sixth point?” I asked. “I suppose it is the sample of cocoa.”

“No,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “I might have included that in the six,
but I did not. No, the sixth point I will keep to myself for the
present.”

He looked quickly round the room. “There is nothing more to be done
here, I think, unless”—he stared earnestly and long at the dead ashes
in the grate. “The fire burns—and it destroys. But by chance—there
might be—let us see!”

Deftly, on hands and knees, he began to sort the ashes from the grate
into the fender, handling them with the greatest caution. Suddenly, he
gave a faint exclamation.

“The forceps, Hastings!”

I quickly handed them to him, and with skill he extracted a small piece
of half charred paper.

“There, _mon ami!_” he cried. “What do you think of that?”

I scrutinized the fragment. This is an exact reproduction of it:—




       03


I was puzzled. It was unusually thick, quite unlike ordinary notepaper.
Suddenly an idea struck me.

“Poirot!” I cried. “This is a fragment of a will!”

“Exactly.”

I looked up at him sharply.

“You are not surprised?”

“No,” he said gravely, “I expected it.”

I relinquished the piece of paper, and watched him put it away in his
case, with the same methodical care that he bestowed on everything. My
brain was in a whirl. What was this complication of a will? Who had
destroyed it? The person who had left the candle grease on the floor?
Obviously. But how had anyone gained admission? All the doors had been
bolted on the inside.

“Now, my friend,” said Poirot briskly, “we will go. I should like to
ask a few questions of the parlourmaid—Dorcas, her name is, is it not?”

We passed through Alfred Inglethorp’s room, and Poirot delayed long
enough to make a brief but fairly comprehensive examination of it. We
went out through that door, locking both it and that of Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room as before.

I took him down to the boudoir which he had expressed a wish to see,
and went myself in search of Dorcas.

When I returned with her, however, the boudoir was empty.

“Poirot,” I cried, “where are you?”

“I am here, my friend.”

He had stepped outside the French window, and was standing, apparently
lost in admiration, before the various shaped flower beds.

“Admirable!” he murmured. “Admirable! What symmetry! Observe that
crescent; and those diamonds—their neatness rejoices the eye. The
spacing of the plants, also, is perfect. It has been recently done; is
it not so?”

“Yes, I believe they were at it yesterday afternoon. But come in—Dorcas
is here.”

“_Eh bien, eh bien!_ Do not grudge me a moment’s satisfaction of the
eye.”

“Yes, but this affair is more important.”

“And how do you know that these fine begonias are not of equal
importance?”

I shrugged my shoulders. There was really no arguing with him if he
chose to take that line.

“You do not agree? But such things have been. Well, we will come in and
interview the brave Dorcas.”

Dorcas was standing in the boudoir, her hands folded in front of her,
and her grey hair rose in stiff waves under her white cap. She was the
very model and picture of a good old-fashioned servant.

In her attitude towards Poirot, she was inclined to be suspicious, but
he soon broke down her defences. He drew forward a chair.

“Pray be seated, mademoiselle.”

“Thank you, sir.”

“You have been with your mistress many years, is it not so?”

“Ten years, sir.”

“That is a long time, and very faithful service. You were much attached
to her, were you not?”

“She was a very good mistress to me, sir.”

“Then you will not object to answering a few questions. I put them to
you with Mr. Cavendish’s full approval.”

“Oh, certainly, sir.”

“Then I will begin by asking you about the events of yesterday
afternoon. Your mistress had a quarrel?”

“Yes, sir. But I don’t know that I ought——” Dorcas hesitated.

Poirot looked at her keenly.

“My good Dorcas, it is necessary that I should know every detail of
that quarrel as fully as possible. Do not think that you are betraying
your mistress’s secrets. Your mistress lies dead, and it is necessary
that we should know all—if we are to avenge her. Nothing can bring her
back to life, but we do hope, if there has been foul play, to bring the
murderer to justice.”

“Amen to that,” said Dorcas fiercely. “And, naming no names, there’s
_one_ in this house that none of us could ever abide! And an ill day it
was when first _he_ darkened the threshold.”

Poirot waited for her indignation to subside, and then, resuming his
business-like tone, he asked:

“Now, as to this quarrel? What is the first you heard of it?”

“Well, sir, I happened to be going along the hall outside yesterday——”

“What time was that?”

“I couldn’t say exactly, sir, but it wasn’t tea-time by a long way.
Perhaps four o’clock—or it may have been a bit later. Well, sir, as I
said, I happened to be passing along, when I heard voices very loud and
angry in here. I didn’t exactly mean to listen, but—well, there it is.
I stopped. The door was shut, but the mistress was speaking very sharp
and clear, and I heard what she said quite plainly. ‘You have lied to
me, and deceived me,’ she said. I didn’t hear what Mr. Inglethorp
replied. He spoke a good bit lower than she did—but she answered: ‘How
dare you? I have kept you and clothed you and fed you! You owe
everything to me! And this is how you repay me! By bringing disgrace
upon our name!’ Again I didn’t hear what he said, but she went on:
‘Nothing that you can say will make any difference. I see my duty
clearly. My mind is made up. You need not think that any fear of
publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.’ Then I
thought I heard them coming out, so I went off quickly.”

“You are sure it was Mr. Inglethorp’s voice you heard?”

“Oh, yes, sir, whose else’s could it be?”

“Well, what happened next?”

“Later, I came back to the hall; but it was all quiet. At five o’clock,
Mrs. Inglethorp rang the bell and told me to bring her a cup of
tea—nothing to eat—to the boudoir. She was looking dreadful—so white
and upset. ‘Dorcas,’ she says, ‘I’ve had a great shock.’ ‘I’m sorry for
that, m’m,’ I says. ‘You’ll feel better after a nice hot cup of tea,
m’m.’ She had something in her hand. I don’t know if it was a letter,
or just a piece of paper, but it had writing on it, and she kept
staring at it, almost as if she couldn’t believe what was written
there. She whispered to herself, as though she had forgotten I was
there: ‘These few words—and everything’s changed.’ And then she says to
me: ‘Never trust a man, Dorcas, they’re not worth it!’ I hurried off,
and got her a good strong cup of tea, and she thanked me, and said
she’d feel better when she’d drunk it. ‘I don’t know what to do,’ she
says. ‘Scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing, Dorcas.
I’d rather hush it up if I could.’ Mrs. Cavendish came in just then, so
she didn’t say any more.”

“She still had the letter, or whatever it was, in her hand?”



“Yes, sir.”

“What would she be likely to do with it afterwards?”

“Well, I don’t know, sir, I expect she would lock it up in that purple
case of hers.”

“Is that where she usually kept important papers?”

“Yes, sir. She brought it down with her every morning, and took it up
every night.”

“When did she lose the key of it?”

“She missed it yesterday at lunch-time, sir, and told me to look
carefully for it. She was very much put out about it.”

“But she had a duplicate key?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

Dorcas was looking very curiously at him and, to tell the truth, so was
I. What was all this about a lost key? Poirot smiled.

“Never mind, Dorcas, it is my business to know things. Is this the key
that was lost?” He drew from his pocket the key that he had found in
the lock of the despatch-case upstairs.

Dorcas’s eyes looked as though they would pop out of her head.

“That’s it, sir, right enough. But where did you find it? I looked
everywhere for it.”

“Ah, but you see it was not in the same place yesterday as it was
to-day. Now, to pass to another subject, had your mistress a dark green
dress in her wardrobe?”

Dorcas was rather startled by the unexpected question.

“No, sir.”

“Are you quite sure?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

“Has anyone else in the house got a green dress?”

Dorcas reflected.

“Miss Cynthia has a green evening dress.”

“Light or dark green?”

“A light green, sir; a sort of chiffon, they call it.”

“Ah, that is not what I want. And nobody else has anything green?”

“No, sir—not that I know of.”

Poirot’s face did not betray a trace of whether he was disappointed or
otherwise. He merely remarked:

“Good, we will leave that and pass on. Have you any reason to believe
that your mistress was likely to take a sleeping powder last night?”

“Not _last_ night, sir, I know she didn’t.”

“Why do you know so positively?”

“Because the box was empty. She took the last one two days ago, and she
didn’t have any more made up.”

“You are quite sure of that?”

“Positive, sir.”

“Then that is cleared up! By the way, your mistress didn’t ask you to
sign any paper yesterday?”

“To sign a paper? No, sir.”

“When Mr. Hastings and Mr. Lawrence came in yesterday evening, they
found your mistress busy writing letters. I suppose you can give me no
idea to whom these letters were addressed?”

“I’m afraid I couldn’t, sir. I was out in the evening. Perhaps Annie
could tell you, though she’s a careless girl. Never cleared the
coffee-cups away last night. That’s what happens when I’m not here to
look after things.”

Poirot lifted his hand.

“Since they have been left, Dorcas, leave them a little longer, I pray
you. I should like to examine them.”

“Very well, sir.”

“What time did you go out last evening?”

“About six o’clock, sir.”

“Thank you, Dorcas, that is all I have to ask you.” He rose and
strolled to the window. “I have been admiring these flower beds. How
many gardeners are employed here, by the way?”

“Only three now, sir. Five, we had, before the war, when it was kept as
a gentleman’s place should be. I wish you could have seen it then, sir.
A fair sight it was. But now there’s only old Manning, and young
William, and a new-fashioned woman gardener in breeches and such-like.
Ah, these are dreadful times!”

“The good times will come again, Dorcas. At least, we hope so. Now,
will you send Annie to me here?”

“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”

“How did you know that Mrs. Inglethorp took sleeping powders?” I asked,
in lively curiosity, as Dorcas left the room. “And about the lost key
and the duplicate?”

“One thing at a time. As to the sleeping powders, I knew by this.” He
suddenly produced a small cardboard box, such as chemists use for
powders.

“Where did you find it?”

“In the wash-stand drawer in Mrs. Inglethorp’s bedroom. It was Number
Six of my catalogue.”

“But I suppose, as the last powder was taken two days ago, it is not of
much importance?”

“Probably not, but do you notice anything that strikes you as peculiar
about this box?”

I examined it closely.

“No, I can’t say that I do.”

“Look at the label.”

I read the label carefully: “‘One powder to be taken at bedtime, if
required. Mrs. Inglethorp.’ No, I see nothing unusual.”

“Not the fact that there is no chemist’s name?”

“Ah!” I exclaimed. “To be sure, that is odd!”

“Have you ever known a chemist to send out a box like that, without his
printed name?”

“No, I can’t say that I have.”

I was becoming quite excited, but Poirot damped my ardour by remarking:

“Yet the explanation is quite simple. So do not intrigue yourself, my
friend.”

An audible creaking proclaimed the approach of Annie, so I had no time
to reply.

Annie was a fine, strapping girl, and was evidently labouring under
intense excitement, mingled with a certain ghoulish enjoyment of the
tragedy.

Poirot came to the point at once, with a business-like briskness.

“I sent for you, Annie, because I thought you might be able to tell me
something about the letters Mrs. Inglethorp wrote last night. How many
were there? And can you tell me any of the names and addresses?”

Annie considered.

“There were four letters, sir. One was to Miss Howard, and one was to
Mr. Wells, the lawyer, and the other two I don’t think I remember,
sir—oh, yes, one was to Ross’s, the caterers in Tadminster. The other
one, I don’t remember.”

“Think,” urged Poirot.

Annie racked her brains in vain.

“I’m sorry, sir, but it’s clean gone. I don’t think I can have noticed
it.”

“It does not matter,” said Poirot, not betraying any sign of
disappointment. “Now I want to ask you about something else. There is a
saucepan in Mrs. Inglethorp’s room with some cocoa in it. Did she have
that every night?”

“Yes, sir, it was put in her room every evening, and she warmed it up
in the night—whenever she fancied it.”

“What was it? Plain cocoa?”

“Yes, sir, made with milk, with a teaspoonful of sugar, and two
teaspoonfuls of rum in it.”

“Who took it to her room?”

“I did, sir.”

“Always?”

“Yes, sir.”

“At what time?”

“When I went to draw the curtains, as a rule, sir.”

“Did you bring it straight up from the kitchen then?”

“No, sir, you see there’s not much room on the gas stove, so cook used
to make it early, before putting the vegetables on for supper. Then I
used to bring it up, and put it on the table by the swing door, and
take it into her room later.”

“The swing door is in the left wing, is it not?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And the table, is it on this side of the door, or on the
farther—servants’ side?”

“It’s this side, sir.”

“What time did you bring it up last night?”

“About quarter-past seven, I should say, sir.”

“And when did you take it into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room?”

“When I went to shut up, sir. About eight o’clock. Mrs. Inglethorp came
up to bed before I’d finished.”

“Then, between seven-fifteen and eight o’clock, the cocoa was standing
on the table in the left wing?”

“Yes, sir.” Annie had been growing redder and redder in the face, and
now she blurted out unexpectedly:

“And if there _was_ salt in it, sir, it wasn’t me. I never took the
salt near it.”

“What makes you think there was salt in it?” asked Poirot.

“Seeing it on the tray, sir.”

“You saw some salt on the tray?”

“Yes. Coarse kitchen salt, it looked. I never noticed it when I took
the tray up, but when I came to take it into the mistress’s room I saw
it at once, and I suppose I ought to have taken it down again, and
asked cook to make some fresh. But I was in a hurry, because Dorcas was
out, and I thought maybe the cocoa itself was all right, and the salt
had only gone on the tray. So I dusted it off with my apron, and took
it in.”

I had the utmost difficulty in controlling my excitement. Unknown to
herself, Annie had provided us with an important piece of evidence. How
she would have gaped if she had realized that her “coarse kitchen salt”
was strychnine, one of the most deadly poisons known to mankind. I
marvelled at Poirot’s calm. His self-control was astonishing. I awaited
his next question with impatience, but it disappointed me.

“When you went into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room, was the door leading into
Miss Cynthia’s room bolted?”

“Oh! Yes, sir; it always was. It had never been opened.”

“And the door into Mr. Inglethorp’s room? Did you notice if that was
bolted too?”

Annie hesitated.

“I couldn’t rightly say, sir; it was shut but I couldn’t say whether it
was bolted or not.”

“When you finally left the room, did Mrs. Inglethorp bolt the door
after you?”

“No, sir, not then, but I expect she did later. She usually did lock it
at night. The door into the passage, that is.”

“Did you notice any candle grease on the floor when you did the room
yesterday?”

“Candle grease? Oh, no, sir. Mrs. Inglethorp didn’t have a candle, only
a reading-lamp.”

“Then, if there had been a large patch of candle grease on the floor,
you think you would have been sure to have seen it?”

“Yes, sir, and I would have taken it out with a piece of blotting-paper
and a hot iron.”

Then Poirot repeated the question he had put to Dorcas:

“Did your mistress ever have a green dress?”

“No, sir.”

“Nor a mantle, nor a cape, nor a—how do you call it?—a sports coat?”

“Not green, sir.”

“Nor anyone else in the house?”

Annie reflected.

“No, sir.”

“You are sure of that?”

“Quite sure.”

“_Bien!_ That is all I want to know. Thank you very much.”

With a nervous giggle, Annie took herself creakingly out of the room.
My pent-up excitement burst forth.

“Poirot,” I cried, “I congratulate you! This is a great discovery.”

“What is a great discovery?”

“Why, that it was the cocoa and not the coffee that was poisoned. That
explains everything! Of course it did not take effect until the early
morning, since the cocoa was only drunk in the middle of the night.”

“So you think that the cocoa—mark well what I say, Hastings, the
_cocoa_—contained strychnine?”

“Of course! That salt on the tray, what else could it have been?”

“It might have been salt,” replied Poirot placidly.

I shrugged my shoulders. If he was going to take the matter that way,
it was no good arguing with him. The idea crossed my mind, not for the
first time, that poor old Poirot was growing old. Privately I thought
it lucky that he had associated with him someone of a more receptive
type of mind.

Poirot was surveying me with quietly twinkling eyes.

“You are not pleased with me, _mon ami?_”

“My dear Poirot,” I said coldly, “it is not for me to dictate to you.
You have a right to your own opinion, just as I have to mine.”

“A most admirable sentiment,” remarked Poirot, rising briskly to his
feet. “Now I have finished with this room. By the way, whose is the
smaller desk in the corner?”

“Mr. Inglethorp’s.”

“Ah!” He tried the roll top tentatively. “Locked. But perhaps one of
Mrs. Inglethorp’s keys would open it.” He tried several, twisting and
turning them with a practiced hand, and finally uttering an ejaculation
of satisfaction. “_Voilà!_ It is not the key, but it will open it at a
pinch.” He slid back the roll top, and ran a rapid eye over the neatly
filed papers. To my surprise, he did not examine them, merely remarking
approvingly as he relocked the desk: “Decidedly, he is a man of method,
this Mr. Inglethorp!”

A “man of method” was, in Poirot’s estimation, the highest praise that
could be bestowed on any individual.

I felt that my friend was not what he had been as he rambled on
disconnectedly:

“There were no stamps in his desk, but there might have been, eh, _mon
ami?_ There might have been? Yes”—his eyes wandered round the
room—“this boudoir has nothing more to tell us. It did not yield much.
Only this.”

He pulled a crumpled envelope out of his pocket, and tossed it over to
me. It was rather a curious document. A plain, dirty looking old
envelope with a few words scrawled across it, apparently at random. The
following is a facsimile of it.




       04








CHAPTER V. “IT ISN’T STRYCHNINE, IS IT?”

“Where did you find this?” I asked Poirot, in lively curiosity.

“In the waste-paper basket. You recognise the handwriting?”

“Yes, it is Mrs. Inglethorp’s. But what does it mean?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“I cannot say—but it is suggestive.”

A wild idea flashed across me. Was it possible that Mrs. Inglethorp’s
mind was deranged? Had she some fantastic idea of demoniacal
possession? And, if that were so, was it not also possible that she
might have taken her own life?

I was about to expound these theories to Poirot, when his own words
distracted me.

“Come,” he said, “now to examine the coffee-cups!”

“My dear Poirot! What on earth is the good of that, now that we know
about the cocoa?”

“Oh, _là là!_ That miserable cocoa!” cried Poirot flippantly.

He laughed with apparent enjoyment, raising his arms to heaven in mock
despair, in what I could not but consider the worst possible taste.

“And, anyway,” I said, with increasing coldness, “as Mrs. Inglethorp
took her coffee upstairs with her, I do not see what you expect to
find, unless you consider it likely that we shall discover a packet of
strychnine on the coffee tray!”

Poirot was sobered at once.

“Come, come, my friend,” he said, slipping his arms through mine. “_Ne
vous fâchez pas!_ Allow me to interest myself in my coffee-cups, and I
will respect your cocoa. There! Is it a bargain?”

He was so quaintly humorous that I was forced to laugh; and we went
together to the drawing-room, where the coffee-cups and tray remained
undisturbed as we had left them.

Poirot made me recapitulate the scene of the night before, listening
very carefully, and verifying the position of the various cups.

“So Mrs. Cavendish stood by the tray—and poured out. Yes. Then she came
across to the window where you sat with Mademoiselle Cynthia. Yes. Here
are the three cups. And the cup on the mantelpiece, half drunk, that
would be Mr. Lawrence Cavendish’s. And the one on the tray?”

“John Cavendish’s. I saw him put it down there.”

“Good. One, two, three, four, five—but where, then, is the cup of Mr.
Inglethorp?”

“He does not take coffee.”

“Then all are accounted for. One moment, my friend.”

With infinite care, he took a drop or two from the grounds in each cup,
sealing them up in separate test tubes, tasting each in turn as he did
so. His physiognomy underwent a curious change. An expression gathered
there that I can only describe as half puzzled, and half relieved.

“_Bien!_” he said at last. “It is evident! I had an idea—but clearly I
was mistaken. Yes, altogether I was mistaken. Yet it is strange. But no
matter!”

And, with a characteristic shrug, he dismissed whatever it was that was
worrying him from his mind. I could have told him from the beginning
that this obsession of his over the coffee was bound to end in a blind
alley, but I restrained my tongue. After all, though he was old, Poirot
had been a great man in his day.

“Breakfast is ready,” said John Cavendish, coming in from the hall.
“You will breakfast with us, Monsieur Poirot?”

Poirot acquiesced. I observed John. Already he was almost restored to
his normal self. The shock of the events of the last night had upset
him temporarily, but his equable poise soon swung back to the normal.
He was a man of very little imagination, in sharp contrast with his
brother, who had, perhaps, too much.

Ever since the early hours of the morning, John had been hard at work,
sending telegrams—one of the first had gone to Evelyn Howard—writing
notices for the papers, and generally occupying himself with the
melancholy duties that a death entails.

“May I ask how things are proceeding?” he said. “Do your investigations
point to my mother having died a natural death—or—or must we prepare
ourselves for the worst?”

“I think, Mr. Cavendish,” said Poirot gravely, “that you would do well
not to buoy yourself up with any false hopes. Can you tell me the views
of the other members of the family?”

“My brother Lawrence is convinced that we are making a fuss over
nothing. He says that everything points to its being a simple case of
heart failure.”

“He does, does he? That is very interesting—very interesting,” murmured
Poirot softly. “And Mrs. Cavendish?”

A faint cloud passed over John’s face.

“I have not the least idea what my wife’s views on the subject are.”

The answer brought a momentary stiffness in its train. John broke the
rather awkward silence by saying with a slight effort:

“I told you, didn’t I, that Mr. Inglethorp has returned?”

Poirot bent his head.

“It’s an awkward position for all of us. Of course one has to treat him
as usual—but, hang it all, one’s gorge does rise at sitting down to eat
with a possible murderer!”

Poirot nodded sympathetically.

“I quite understand. It is a very difficult situation for you, Mr.
Cavendish. I would like to ask you one question. Mr. Inglethorp’s
reason for not returning last night was, I believe, that he had
forgotten the latch-key. Is not that so?”

“Yes.”

“I suppose you are quite sure that the latch-key _was_ forgotten—that
he did not take it after all?”

“I have no idea. I never thought of looking. We always keep it in the
hall drawer. I’ll go and see if it’s there now.”

Poirot held up his hand with a faint smile.

“No, no, Mr. Cavendish, it is too late now. I am certain that you would
find it. If Mr. Inglethorp did take it, he has had ample time to
replace it by now.”

“But do you think——”

“I think nothing. If anyone had chanced to look this morning before his
return, and seen it there, it would have been a valuable point in his
favour. That is all.”

John looked perplexed.

“Do not worry,” said Poirot smoothly. “I assure you that you need not
let it trouble you. Since you are so kind, let us go and have some
breakfast.”

Everyone was assembled in the dining-room. Under the circumstances, we
were naturally not a cheerful party. The reaction after a shock is
always trying, and I think we were all suffering from it. Decorum and
good breeding naturally enjoined that our demeanour should be much as
usual, yet I could not help wondering if this self-control were really
a matter of great difficulty. There were no red eyes, no signs of
secretly indulged grief. I felt that I was right in my opinion that
Dorcas was the person most affected by the personal side of the
HAPTER II. THE 16TH AND 17TH OF JULY

I had arrived at Styles on the 5th of July. I come now to the events of
the 16th and 17th of that month. For the convenience of the reader I
will recapitulate the incidents of those days in as exact a manner as
possible. They were elicited subsequently at the trial by a process of
long and tedious cross-examinations.

I received a letter from Evelyn Howard a couple of days after her
departure, telling me she was working as a nurse at the big hospital in
Middlingham, a manufacturing town some fifteen miles away, and begging
me to let her know if Mrs. Inglethorp should show any wish to be
reconciled.

The only fly in the ointment of my peaceful days was Mrs. Cavendish’s
extraordinary, and, for my part, unaccountable preference for the
society of Dr. Bauerstein. What she saw in the man I cannot imagine,
but she was always asking him up to the house, and often went off for
long expeditions with him. I must confess that I was quite unable to
see his attraction.

The 16th of July fell on a Monday. It was a day of turmoil. The famous
bazaar had taken place on Saturday, and an entertainment, in connection
with the same charity, at which Mrs. Inglethorp was to recite a War
poem, was to be held that night. We were all busy during the morning
arranging and decorating the Hall in the village where it was to take
place. We had a late luncheon and spent the afternoon resting in the
garden. I noticed that John’s manner was somewhat unusual. He seemed
very excited and restless.

After tea, Mrs. Inglethorp went to lie down to rest before her efforts
in the evening and I challenged Mary Cavendish to a single at tennis.

About a quarter to seven, Mrs. Inglethorp called us that we should be
late as supper was early that night. We had rather a scramble to get
ready in time; and before the meal was over the motor was waiting at
the door.

The entertainment was a great success, Mrs. Inglethorp’s recitation
receiving tremendous applause. There were also some tableaux in which
Cynthia took part. She did not return with us, having been asked to a
supper party, and to remain the night with some friends who had been
acting with her in the tableaux.

The following morning, Mrs. Inglethorp stayed in bed to breakfast, as
she was rather overtired; but she appeared in her briskest mood about
12.30, and swept Lawrence and myself off to a luncheon party.

“Such a charming invitation from Mrs. Rolleston. Lady Tadminster’s
sister, you know. The Rollestons came over with the Conqueror—one of
our oldest families.”

Mary had excused herself on the plea of an engagement with Dr.
Bauerstein.

We had a pleasant luncheon, and as we drove away Lawrence suggested
that we should return by Tadminster, which was barely a mile out of our
way, and pay a visit to Cynthia in her dispensary. Mrs. Inglethorp
replied that this was an excellent idea, but as she had several letters
to write she would drop us there, and we could come back with Cynthia
in the pony-trap.

We were detained under suspicion by the hospital porter, until Cynthia
appeared to vouch for us, looking very cool and sweet in her long white
overall. She took us up to her sanctum, and introduced us to her fellow
dispenser, a rather awe-inspiring individual, whom Cynthia cheerily
addressed as “Nibs.”

“What a lot of bottles!” I exclaimed, as my eye travelled round the
small room. “Do you really know what’s in them all?”

“Say something original,” groaned Cynthia. “Every single person who
comes up here says that. We are really thinking of bestowing a prize on
the first individual who does _not_ say: ‘What a lot of bottles!’ And I
know the next thing you’re going to say is: ‘How many people have you
poisoned?’”

I pleaded guilty with a laugh.

“If you people only knew how fatally easy it is to poison someone by
mistake, you wouldn’t joke about it. Come on, let’s have tea. We’ve got
all sorts of secret stories in that cupboard. No, Lawrence—that’s the
poison cupboard. The big cupboard—that’s right.”

We had a very cheery tea, and assisted Cynthia to wash up afterwards.
We had just put away the last tea-spoon when a knock came at the door.
The countenances of Cynthia and Nibs were suddenly petrified into a
stern and forbidding expression.

“Come in,” said Cynthia, in a sharp professional tone.

A young and rather scared looking nurse appeared with a bottle which
she proffered to Nibs, who waved her towards Cynthia with the somewhat
enigmatical remark:

“_I_’m not really here to-day.”

Cynthia took the bottle and examined it with the severity of a judge.

“This should have been sent up this morning.”

“Sister is very sorry. She forgot.”

“Sister should read the rules outside the door.”

I gathered from the little nurse’s expression that there was not the
least likelihood of her having the hardihood to retail this message to
the dreaded “Sister”.

“So now it can’t be done until to-morrow,” finished Cynthia.

“Don’t you think you could possibly let us have it to-night?”

“Well,” said Cynthia graciously, “we are very busy, but if we have time
it shall be done.”

The little nurse withdrew, and Cynthia promptly took a jar from the
shelf, refilled the bottle, and placed it on the table outside the
door.

I laughed.

“Discipline must be maintained?”

“Exactly. Come out on our little balcony. You can see all the outside
wards there.”

I followed Cynthia and her friend and they pointed out the different
wards to me. Lawrence remained behind, but after a few moments Cynthia
called to him over her shoulder to come and join us. Then she looked at
her watch.

“Nothing more to do, Nibs?”

“No.”

“All right. Then we can lock up and go.”

I had seen Lawrence in quite a different light that afternoon. Compared
to John, he was an astoundingly difficult person to get to know. He was
the opposite of his brother in almost every respect, being unusually
shy and reserved. Yet he had a certain charm of manner, and I fancied
that, if one really knew him well, one could have a deep affection for
him. I had always fancied that his manner to Cynthia was rather
constrained, and that she on her side was inclined to be shy of him.
But they were both gay enough this afternoon, and chatted together like
a couple of children.

As we drove through the village, I remembered that I wanted some
stamps, so accordingly we pulled up at the post office.

As I came out again, I cannoned into a little man who was just
entering. I drew aside and apologised, when suddenly, with a loud
exclamation, he clasped me in his arms and kissed me warmly.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings!” he cried. “It is indeed _mon ami_ Hastings!”

“Poirot!” I exclaimed.

I turned to the pony-trap.

“This is a very pleasant meeting for me, Miss Cynthia. This is my old
friend, Monsieur Poirot, whom I have not seen for years.”

“Oh, we know Monsieur Poirot,” said Cynthia gaily. “But I had no idea
he was a friend of yours.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Poirot seriously. “I know Mademoiselle Cynthia. It
is by the charity of that good Mrs. Inglethorp that I am here.” Then,
as I looked at him inquiringly: “Yes, my friend, she had kindly
extended hospitality to seven of my countrypeople who, alas, are
refugees from their native land. We Belgians will always remember her
with gratitude.”

Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more than
five feet, four inches, but carried himself with great dignity. His
head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little
on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. The neatness of
his attire was almost incredible. I believe a speck of dust would have
caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandified
little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his
time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police. As a
detective, his _flair_ had been extraordinary, and he had achieved
triumphs by unravelling some of the most baffling cases of the day.

He pointed out to me the little house inhabited by him and his fellow
Belgians, and I promised to go and see him at an early date. Then he
raised his hat with a flourish to Cynthia, and we drove away.

“He’s a dear little man,” said Cynthia. “I’d no idea you knew him.”

“You’ve been entertaining a celebrity unawares,” I replied.

And, for the rest of the way home, I recited to them the various
exploits and triumphs of Hercule Poirot.

We arrived back in a very cheerful mood. As we entered the hall, Mrs.
Inglethorp came out of her boudoir. She looked flushed and upset.

“Oh, it’s you,” she said.

“Is there anything the matter, Aunt Emily?” asked Cynthia.

“Certainly not,” said Mrs. Inglethorp sharply. “What should there be?”
Then catching sight of Dorcas, the parlourmaid, going into the
dining-room, she called to her to bring some stamps into the boudoir.

“Yes, m’m.” The old servant hesitated, then added diffidently: “Don’t
you think, m’m, you’d better get to bed? You’re looking very tired.”

“Perhaps you’re right, Dorcas—yes—no—not now. I’ve some letters I must
finish by post-time. Have you lighted the fire in my room as I told
you?”

“Yes, m’m.”

“Then I’ll go to bed directly after supper.”

She went into the boudoir again, and Cynthia stared after her.

“Goodness gracious! I wonder what’s up?” she said to Lawrence.

He did not seem to have heard her, for without a word he turned on his
heel and went out of the house.

I suggested a quick game of tennis before supper and, Cynthia agreeing,
I ran upstairs to fetch my racquet.

Mrs. Cavendish was coming down the stairs. It may have been my fancy,
but she, too, was looking odd and disturbed.

“Had a good walk with Dr. Bauerstein?” I asked, trying to appear as
indifferent as I could.

“I didn’t go,” she replied abruptly. “Where is Mrs. Inglethorp?”

“In the boudoir.”

Her hand clenched itself on the banisters, then she seemed to nerve
herself for some encounter, and went rapidly past me down the stairs
across the hall to the boudoir, the door of which she shut behind her.

As I ran out to the tennis court a few moments later, I had to pass the
open boudoir window, and was unable to help overhearing the following
scrap of dialogue. Mary Cavendish was saying in the voice of a woman
desperately controlling herself:

“Then you won’t show it to me?”

To which Mrs. Inglethorp replied:

“My dear Mary, it has nothing to do with that matter.”

“Then show it to me.”

“I tell you it is not what you imagine. It does not concern you in the
least.”

To which Mary Cavendish replied, with a rising bitterness:

“Of course, I might have known you would shield him.”

Cynthia was waiting for me, and greeted me eagerly with:

“I say! There’s been the most awful row! I’ve got it all out of
Dorcas.”

“What kind of a row?”

“Between Aunt Emily and _him_. I do hope she’s found him out at last!”

“Was Dorcas there, then?”

“Of course not. She ‘happened to be near the door’. It was a real old
bust-up. I do wish I knew what it was all about.”

I thought of Mrs. Raikes’s gipsy face, and Evelyn Howard’s warnings,
but wisely decided to hold my peace, whilst Cynthia exhausted every
possible hypothesis, and cheerfully hoped, “Aunt Emily will send him
away, and will never speak to him again.”

I was anxious to get hold of John, but he was nowhere to be seen.
Evidently something very momentous had occurred that afternoon. I tried
to forget the few words I had overheard; but, do what I would, I could
not dismiss them altogether from my mind. What was Mary Cavendish’s
concern in the matter?

Mr. Inglethorp was in the drawing-room when I came down to supper. His
face was impassive as ever, and the strange unreality of the man struck
me afresh.

Mrs. Inglethorp came down last. She still looked agitated, and during
the meal there was a somewhat constrained silence. Inglethorp was
unusually quiet. As a rule, he surrounded his wife with little
attentions, placing a cushion at her back, and altogether playing the
part of the devoted husband. Immediately after supper, Mrs. Inglethorp
retired to her boudoir again.

“Send my coffee in here, Mary,” she called. “I’ve just five minutes to
catch the post.”

Cynthia and I went and sat by the open window in the drawing-room. Mary
Cavendish brought our coffee to us. She seemed excited.

“Do you young people want lights, or do you enjoy the twilight?” she
asked. “Will you take Mrs. Inglethorp her coffee, Cynthia? I will pour
it out.”

“Do not trouble, Mary,” said Inglethorp. “I will take it to Emily.” He
poured it out, and went out of the room carrying it carefully.

Lawrence followed him, and Mrs. Cavendish sat down by us.

We three sat for some time in silence. It was a glorious night, hot and
still. Mrs. Cavendish fanned herself gently with a palm leaf.

“It’s almost too hot,” she murmured. “We shall have a thunderstorm.”

Alas, that these harmonious moments can never endure! My paradise was
rudely shattered by the sound of a well known, and heartily disliked,
voice in the hall.

“Dr. Bauerstein!” exclaimed Cynthia. “What a funny time to come.”

I glanced jealously at Mary Cavendish, but she seemed quite
undisturbed, the delicate pallor of her cheeks did not vary.

In a few moments, Alfred Inglethorp had ushered the doctor in, the
latter laughing, and protesting that he was in no fit state for a
drawing-room. In truth, he presented a sorry spectacle, being literally
plastered with mud.

“What have you been doing, doctor?” cried Mrs. Cavendish.

“I must make my apologies,” said the doctor. “I did not really mean to
come in, but Mr. Inglethorp insisted.”

“Well, Bauerstein, you are in a plight,” said John, strolling in from
the hall. “Have some coffee, and tell us what you have been up to.”

“Thank you, I will.” He laughed rather ruefully, as he described how he
had discovered a very rare species of fern in an inaccessible place,
and in his efforts to obtain it had lost his footing, and slipped
ignominiously into a neighbouring pond.

“The sun soon dried me off,” he added, “but I’m afraid my appearance is
very disreputable.”

At this juncture, Mrs. Inglethorp called to Cynthia from the hall, and
the girl ran out.

“Just carry up my despatch-case, will you, dear? I’m going to bed.”

The door into the hall was a wide one. I had risen when Cynthia did,
John was close by me. There were therefore three witnesses who could
swear that Mrs. Inglethorp was carrying her coffee, as yet untasted, in
her hand.

My evening was utterly and entirely spoilt by the presence of Dr.
Bauerstein. It seemed to me the man would never go. He rose at last,
however, and I breathed a sigh of relief.

“I’ll walk down to the village with you,” said Mr. Inglethorp. “I must
see our agent over those estate accounts.” He turned to John. “No one
need sit up. I will take the latch-key.”






CHAPTER III. THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDY

To make this part of my story clear, I append the following plan of the
first floor of Styles. The servants’ rooms are reached through the door
B. They have no communication with the right wing, where the
Inglethorps’ rooms were situated.




       01



It seemed to be the middle of the night when I was awakened by Lawrence
Cavendish. He had a candle in his hand, and the agitation of his face
told me at once that something was seriously wrong.

“What’s the matter?” I asked, sitting up in bed, and trying to collect
my scattered thoughts.

“We are afraid my mother is very ill. She seems to be having some kind
of fit. Unfortunately she has locked herself in.”

“I’ll come at once.”

I sprang out of bed; and, pulling on a dressing-gown, followed Lawrence
along the passage and the gallery to the right wing of the house.

John Cavendish joined us, and one or two of the servants were standing
round in a state of awe-stricken excitement. Lawrence turned to his
brother.

“What do you think we had better do?”

Never, I thought, had his indecision of character been more apparent.

John rattled the handle of Mrs. Inglethorp’s door violently, but with
no effect. It was obviously locked or bolted on the inside. The whole
household was aroused by now. The most alarming sounds were audible
from the interior of the room. Clearly something must be done.

“Try going through Mr. Inglethorp’s room, sir,” cried Dorcas. “Oh, the
poor mistress!”

Suddenly I realized that Alfred Inglethorp was not with us—that he
alone had given no sign of his presence. John opened the door of his
room. It was pitch dark, but Lawrence was following with the candle,
and by its feeble light we saw that the bed had not been slept in, and
that there was no sign of the room having been occupied.

We went straight to the connecting door. That, too, was locked or
bolted on the inside. What was to be done?

“Oh, dear, sir,” cried Dorcas, wringing her hands, “what ever shall we
do?”

“We must try and break the door in, I suppose. It’ll be a tough job,
though. Here, let one of the maids go down and wake Baily and tell him
to go for Dr. Wilkins at once. Now then, we’ll have a try at the door.
Half a moment, though, isn’t there a door into Miss Cynthia’s rooms?”

“Yes, sir, but that’s always bolted. It’s never been undone.”

“Well, we might just see.”

He ran rapidly down the corridor to Cynthia’s room. Mary Cavendish was
there, shaking the girl—who must have been an unusually sound
sleeper—and trying to wake her.

In a moment or two he was back.

“No good. That’s bolted too. We must break in the door. I think this
one is a shade less solid than the one in the passage.”

We strained and heaved together. The framework of the door was solid,
and for a long time it resisted our efforts, but at last we felt it
give beneath our weight, and finally, with a resounding crash, it was
burst open.

We stumbled in together, Lawrence still holding his candle. Mrs.
Inglethorp was lying on the bed, her whole form agitated by violent
convulsions, in one of which she must have overturned the table beside
her. As we entered, however, her limbs relaxed, and she fell back upon
the pillows.

John strode across the room, and lit the gas. Turning to Annie, one of
the housemaids, he sent her downstairs to the dining-room for brandy.
Then he went across to his mother whilst I unbolted the door that gave
on the corridor.

I turned to Lawrence, to suggest that I had better leave them now that
there was no further need of my services, but the words were frozen on
my lips. Never have I seen such a ghastly look on any man’s face. He
was white as chalk, the candle he held in his shaking hand was
sputtering onto the carpet, and his eyes, petrified with terror, or
some such kindred emotion, stared fixedly over my head at a point on
the further wall. It was as though he had seen something that turned
him to stone. I instinctively followed the direction of his eyes, but I
could see nothing unusual. The still feebly flickering ashes in the
grate, and the row of prim ornaments on the mantelpiece, were surely
harmless enough.

The violence of Mrs. Inglethorp’s attack seemed to be passing. She was
able to speak in short gasps.

“Better now—very sudden—stupid of me—to lock myself in.”

A shadow fell on the bed and, looking up, I saw Mary Cavendish standing
near the door with her arm around Cynthia. She seemed to be supporting
the girl, who looked utterly dazed and unlike herself. Her face was
heavily flushed, and she yawned repeatedly.

“Poor Cynthia is quite frightened,” said Mrs. Cavendish in a low clear
voice. She herself, I noticed, was dressed in her white land smock.
Then it must be later than I thought. I saw that a faint streak of
daylight was showing through the curtains of the windows, and that the
clock on the mantelpiece pointed to close upon five o’clock.

A strangled cry from the bed startled me. A fresh access of pain seized
the unfortunate old lady. The convulsions were of a violence terrible
to behold. Everything was confusion. We thronged round her, powerless
to help or alleviate. A final convulsion lifted her from the bed, until
she appeared to rest upon her head and her heels, with her body arched
in an extraordinary manner. In vain Mary and John tried to administer
more brandy. The moments flew. Again the body arched itself in that
peculiar fashion.

At that moment, Dr. Bauerstein pushed his way authoritatively into the
room. For one instant he stopped dead, staring at the figure on the
bed, and, at the same instant, Mrs. Inglethorp cried out in a strangled
voice, her eyes fixed on the doctor:

“Alfred—Alfred——” Then she fell back motionless on the pillows.

With a stride, the doctor reached the bed, and seizing her arms worked
them energetically, applying what I knew to be artificial respiration.
He issued a few short sharp orders to the servants. An imperious wave
of his hand drove us all to the door. We watched him, fascinated,
though I think we all knew in our hearts that it was too late, and that
nothing could be done now. I could see by the expression on his face
that he himself had little hope.

Finally he abandoned his task, shaking his head gravely. At that
moment, we heard footsteps outside, and Dr. Wilkins, Mrs. Inglethorp’s
own doctor, a portly, fussy little man, came bustling in.

In a few words Dr. Bauerstein explained how he had happened to be
passing the lodge gates as the car came out, and had run up to the
house as fast as he could, whilst the car went on to fetch Dr. Wilkins.
With a faint gesture of the hand, he indicated the figure on the bed.

“Ve—ry sad. Ve—ry sad,” murmured Dr. Wilkins. “Poor dear lady. Always
did far too much—far too much—against my advice. I warned her. Her
heart was far from strong. ‘Take it easy,’ I said to her,
‘Take—it—easy’. But no—her zeal for good works was too great. Nature
rebelled. Na—ture—re—belled.”

Dr. Bauerstein, I noticed, was watching the local doctor narrowly. He
still kept his eyes fixed on him as he spoke.

“The convulsions were of a peculiar violence, Dr. Wilkins. I am sorry
you were not here in time to witness them. They were quite—tetanic in
character.”

“Ah!” said Dr. Wilkins wisely.

“I should like to speak to you in private,” said Dr. Bauerstein. He
turned to John. “You do not object?”

“Certainly not.”

We all trooped out into the corridor, leaving the two doctors alone,
and I heard the key turned in the lock behind us.

We went slowly down the stairs. I was violently excited. I have a
certain talent for deduction, and Dr. Bauerstein’s manner had started a
flock of wild surmises in my mind. Mary Cavendish laid her hand upon my
arm.

“What is it? Why did Dr. Bauerstein seem so—peculiar?”

I looked at her.

“Do you know what I think?”

“What?”

“Listen!” I looked round, the others were out of earshot. I lowered my
voice to a whisper. “I believe she has been poisoned! I’m certain Dr.
Bauerstein suspects it.”

“_What?_” She shrank against the wall, the pupils of her eyes dilating
wildly. Then, with a sudden cry that startled me, she cried out: “No,
no—not that—not that!” And breaking from me, fled up the stairs. I
followed her, afraid that she was going to faint. I found her leaning
against the bannisters, deadly pale. She waved me away impatiently.

“No, no—leave me. I’d rather be alone. Let me just be quiet for a
minute or two. Go down to the others.”

I obeyed her reluctantly. John and Lawrence were in the dining-room. I
joined them. We were all silent, but I suppose I voiced the thoughts of
us all when I at last broke it by saying:

“Where is Mr. Inglethorp?”

John shook his head.

“He’s not in the house.”

Our eyes met. Where _was_ Alfred Inglethorp? His absence was strange
and inexplicable. I remembered Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words. What lay
beneath them? What more could she have told us, if she had had time?

At last we heard the doctors descending the stairs. Dr. Wilkins was
looking important and excited, and trying to conceal an inward
exultation under a manner of decorous calm. Dr. Bauerstein remained in
the background, his grave bearded face unchanged. Dr. Wilkins was the
spokesman for the two. He addressed himself to John:

“Mr. Cavendish, I should like your consent to a post-mortem.”

“Is that necessary?” asked John gravely. A spasm of pain crossed his
face.

“Absolutely,” said Dr. Bauerstein.

“You mean by that——?”

“That neither Dr. Wilkins nor myself could give a death certificate
under the circumstances.”

John bent his head.

“In that case, I have no alternative but to agree.”

“Thank you,” said Dr. Wilkins briskly. “We propose that it should take
place to-morrow night—or rather to-night.” And he glanced at the
daylight. “Under the circumstances, I am afraid an inquest can hardly
be avoided—these formalities are necessary, but I beg that you won’t
distress yourselves.”

There was a pause, and then Dr. Bauerstein drew two keys from his
pocket, and handed them to John.

“These are the keys of the two rooms. I have locked them and, in my
opinion, they would be better kept locked for the present.”

The doctors then departed.

I had been turning over an idea in my head, and I felt that the moment
had now come to broach it. Yet I was a little chary of doing so. John,
I knew, had a horror of any kind of publicity, and was an easygoing
optimist, who preferred never to meet trouble half-way. It might be
difficult to convince him of the soundness of my plan. Lawrence, on the
other hand, being less conventional, and having more imagination, I
felt I might count upon as an ally. There was no doubt that the moment
had come for me to take the lead.

“John,” I said, “I am going to ask you something.”

“Well?”

“You remember my speaking of my friend Poirot? The Belgian who is here?
He has been a most famous detective.”

“Yes.”

“I want you to let me call him in—to investigate this matter.”

“What—now? Before the post-mortem?”

“Yes, time is an advantage if—if—there has been foul play.”

“Rubbish!” cried Lawrence angrily. “In my opinion the whole thing is a
mare’s nest of Bauerstein’s! Wilkins hadn’t an idea of such a thing,
until Bauerstein put it into his head. But, like all specialists,
Bauerstein’s got a bee in his bonnet. Poisons are his hobby, so of
course he sees them everywhere.”

I confess that I was surprised by Lawrence’s attitude. He was so seldom
vehement about anything.

John hesitated.

“I can’t feel as you do, Lawrence,” he said at last. “I’m inclined to
give Hastings a free hand, though I should prefer to wait a bit. We
don’t want any unnecessary scandal.”

“No, no,” I cried eagerly, “you need have no fear of that. Poirot is
discretion itself.”

“Very well, then, have it your own way. I leave it in your hands.
Though, if it is as we suspect, it seems a clear enough case. God
forgive me if I am wronging him!”

I looked at my watch. It was six o’clock. I determined to lose no time.

Five minutes’ delay, however, I allowed myself. I spent it in
ransacking the library until I discovered a medical book which gave a
description of strychnine poisoning.






CHAPTER IV. POIROT INVESTIGATES

The house which the Belgians occupied in the village was quite close to
the park gates. One could save time by taking a narrow path through the
long grass, which cut off the detours of the winding drive. So I,
accordingly, went that way. I had nearly reached the lodge, when my
attention was arrested by the running figure of a man approaching me.
It was Mr. Inglethorp. Where had he been? How did he intend to explain
his absence?

He accosted me eagerly.

“My God! This is terrible! My poor wife! I have only just heard.”

“Where have you been?” I asked.

“Denby kept me late last night. It was one o’clock before we’d
finished. Then I found that I’d forgotten the latch-key after all. I
didn’t want to arouse the household, so Denby gave me a bed.”

“How did you hear the news?” I asked.

“Wilkins knocked Denby up to tell him. My poor Emily! She was so
self-sacrificing—such a noble character. She over-taxed her strength.”

A wave of revulsion swept over me. What a consummate hypocrite the man
was!

“I must hurry on,” I said, thankful that he did not ask me whither I
was bound.

In a few minutes I was knocking at the door of Leastways Cottage.

Getting no answer, I repeated my summons impatiently. A window above me
was cautiously opened, and Poirot himself looked out.

He gave an exclamation of surprise at seeing me. In a few brief words,
I explained the tragedy that had occurred, and that I wanted his help.

“Wait, my friend, I will let you in, and you shall recount to me the
affair whilst I dress.”

In a few moments he had unbarred the door, and I followed him up to his
room. There he installed me in a chair, and I related the whole story,
keeping back nothing, and omitting no circumstance, however
insignificant, whilst he himself made a careful and deliberate toilet.

I told him of my awakening, of Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words, of her
husband’s absence, of the quarrel the day before, of the scrap of
conversation between Mary and her mother-in-law that I had overheard,
of the former quarrel between Mrs. Inglethorp and Evelyn Howard, and of
the latter’s innuendoes.

I was hardly as clear as I could wish. I repeated myself several times,
and occasionally had to go back to some detail that I had forgotten.
Poirot smiled kindly on me.

“The mind is confused? Is it not so? Take time, _mon ami_. You are
agitated; you are excited—it is but natural. Presently, when we are
calmer, we will arrange the facts, neatly, each in his proper place. We
will examine—and reject. Those of importance we will put on one side;
those of no importance, pouf!”—he screwed up his cherub-like face, and
puffed comically enough—“blow them away!”

“That’s all very well,” I objected, “but how are you going to decide
what is important, and what isn’t? That always seems the difficulty to
me.”

Poirot shook his head energetically. He was now arranging his moustache
with exquisite care.

“Not so. _Voyons!_ One fact leads to another—so we continue. Does the
next fit in with that? _A merveille!_ Good! We can proceed. This next
little fact—no! Ah, that is curious! There is something missing—a link
in the chain that is not there. We examine. We search. And that little
curious fact, that possibly paltry little detail that will not tally,
we put it here!” He made an extravagant gesture with his hand. “It is
significant! It is tremendous!”

“Y—es——”

“Ah!” Poirot shook his forefinger so fiercely at me that I quailed
before it. “Beware! Peril to the detective who says: ‘It is so small—it
does not matter. It will not agree. I will forget it.’ That way lies
confusion! Everything matters.”

“I know. You always told me that. That’s why I have gone into all the
details of this thing whether they seemed to me relevant or not.”

“And I am pleased with you. You have a good memory, and you have given
me the facts faithfully. Of the order in which you present them, I say
nothing—truly, it is deplorable! But I make allowances—you are upset.
To that I attribute the circumstance that you have omitted one fact of
paramount importance.”

“What is that?” I asked.

“You have not told me if Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night.”

I stared at him. Surely the war had affected the little man’s brain. He
was carefully engaged in brushing his coat before putting it on, and
seemed wholly engrossed in the task.

“I don’t remember,” I said. “And, anyway, I don’t see——”

“You do not see? But it is of the first importance.”

“I can’t see why,” I said, rather nettled. “As far as I can remember,
she didn’t eat much. She was obviously upset, and it had taken her
appetite away. That was only natural.”

“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “it was only natural.”

He opened a drawer, and took out a small despatch-case, then turned to
me.

“Now I am ready. We will proceed to the château, and study matters on
the spot. Excuse me, _mon ami_, you dressed in haste, and your tie is
on one side. Permit me.” With a deft gesture, he rearranged it.

“_Ça y est!_ Now, shall we start?”

We hurried up the village, and turned in at the lodge gates. Poirot
stopped for a moment, and gazed sorrowfully over the beautiful expanse
of park, still glittering with morning dew.

“So beautiful, so beautiful, and yet, the poor family, plunged in
sorrow, prostrated with grief.”

He looked at me keenly as he spoke, and I was aware that I reddened
under his prolonged gaze.

Was the family prostrated by grief? Was the sorrow at Mrs. Inglethorp’s
death so great? I realized that there was an emotional lack in the
atmosphere. The dead woman had not the gift of commanding love. Her
death was a shock and a distress, but she would not be passionately
regretted.

Poirot seemed to follow my thoughts. He nodded his head gravely.

“No, you are right,” he said, “it is not as though there was a blood
tie. She has been kind and generous to these Cavendishes, but she was
not their own mother. Blood tells—always remember that—blood tells.”

“Poirot,” I said, “I wish you would tell me why you wanted to know if
Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night? I have been turning it over in my
mind, but I can’t see how it has anything to do with the matter?”

He was silent for a minute or two as we walked along, but finally he
said:

“I do not mind telling you—though, as you know, it is not my habit to
explain until the end is reached. The present contention is that Mrs.
Inglethorp died of strychnine poisoning, presumably administered in her
coffee.”

“Yes?”

“Well, what time was the coffee served?”

“About eight o’clock.”

“Therefore she drank it between then and half-past eight—certainly not
much later. Well, strychnine is a fairly rapid poison. Its effects
would be felt very soon, probably in about an hour. Yet, in Mrs.
Inglethorp’s case, the symptoms do not manifest themselves until five
o’clock the next morning: nine hours! But a heavy meal, taken at about
the same time as the poison, might retard its effects, though hardly to
that extent. Still, it is a possibility to be taken into account. But,
according to you, she ate very little for supper, and yet the symptoms
do not develop until early the next morning! Now that is a curious
circumstance, my friend. Something may arise at the autopsy to explain
it. In the meantime, remember it.”

As we neared the house, John came out and met us. His face looked weary
and haggard.

“This is a very dreadful business, Monsieur Poirot,” he said. “Hastings
has explained to you that we are anxious for no publicity?”

“I comprehend perfectly.”

“You see, it is only suspicion so far. We have nothing to go upon.”

“Precisely. It is a matter of precaution only.”

John turned to me, taking out his cigarette-case, and lighting a
cigarette as he did so.

“You know that fellow Inglethorp is back?”

“Yes. I met him.”

John flung the match into an adjacent flower bed, a proceeding which
was too much for Poirot’s feelings. He retrieved it, and buried it
neatly.

“It’s jolly difficult to know how to treat him.”

“That difficulty will not exist long,” pronounced Poirot quietly.

John looked puzzled, not quite understanding the portent of this
cryptic saying. He handed the two keys which Dr. Bauerstein had given
him to me.

“Show Monsieur Poirot everything he wants to see.”

“The rooms are locked?” asked Poirot.

“Dr. Bauerstein considered it advisable.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“Then he is very sure. Well, that simplifies matters for us.”

We went up together to the room of the tragedy. For convenience I
append a plan of the room and the principal articles of furniture in
it.




       02



Poirot locked the door on the inside, and proceeded to a minute
inspection of the room. He darted from one object to the other with the
agility of a grasshopper. I remained by the door, fearing to obliterate
any clues. Poirot, however, did not seem grateful to me for my
forbearance.

“What have you, my friend,” he cried, “that you remain there like—how
do you say it?—ah, yes, the stuck pig?”

I explained that I was afraid of obliterating any foot-marks.

“Foot-marks? But what an idea! There has already been practically an
army in the room! What foot-marks are we likely to find? No, come here
and aid me in my search. I will put down my little case until I need
it.”

He did so, on the round table by the window, but it was an ill-advised
proceeding; for, the top of it being loose, it tilted up, and
precipitated the despatch-case on the floor.

“_Eh voilà une table!_” cried Poirot. “Ah, my friend, one may live in a
big house and yet have no comfort.”

After which piece of moralizing, he resumed his search.

A small purple despatch-case, with a key in the lock, on the
writing-table, engaged his attention for some time. He took out the key
from the lock, and passed it to me to inspect. I saw nothing peculiar,
however. It was an ordinary key of the Yale type, with a bit of twisted
wire through the handle.

Next, he examined the framework of the door we had broken in, assuring
himself that the bolt had really been shot. Then he went to the door
opposite leading into Cynthia’s room. That door was also bolted, as I
had stated. However, he went to the length of unbolting it, and opening
and shutting it several times; this he did with the utmost precaution
against making any noise. Suddenly something in the bolt itself seemed
to rivet his attention. He examined it carefully, and then, nimbly
whipping out a pair of small forceps from his case, he drew out some
minute particle which he carefully sealed up in a tiny envelope.

On the chest of drawers there was a tray with a spirit lamp and a small
saucepan on it. A small quantity of a dark fluid remained in the
saucepan, and an empty cup and saucer that had been drunk out of stood
near it.

I wondered how I could have been so unobservant as to overlook this.
Here was a clue worth having. Poirot delicately dipped his finger into
liquid, and tasted it gingerly. He made a grimace.

“Cocoa—with—I think—rum in it.”

He passed on to the debris on the floor, where the table by the bed had
been overturned. A reading-lamp, some books, matches, a bunch of keys,
and the crushed fragments of a coffee-cup lay scattered about.

“Ah, this is curious,” said Poirot.

“I must confess that I see nothing particularly curious about it.”

“You do not? Observe the lamp—the chimney is broken in two places; they
lie there as they fell. But see, the coffee-cup is absolutely smashed
to powder.”

“Well,” I said wearily, “I suppose someone must have stepped on it.”

“Exactly,” said Poirot, in an odd voice. “Someone stepped on it.”

He rose from his knees, and walked slowly across to the mantelpiece,
where he stood abstractedly fingering the ornaments, and straightening
them—a trick of his when he was agitated.

“_Mon ami_,” he said, turning to me, “somebody stepped on that cup,
grinding it to powder, and the reason they did so was either because it
contained strychnine or—which is far more serious—because it did not
contain strychnine!”

I made no reply. I was bewildered, but I knew that it was no good
asking him to explain. In a moment or two he roused himself, and went
on with his investigations. He picked up the bunch of keys from the
floor, and twirling them round in his fingers finally selected one,
very bright and shining, which he tried in the lock of the purple
despatch-case. It fitted, and he opened the box, but after a moment’s
hesitation, closed and relocked it, and slipped the bunch of keys, as
well as the key that had originally stood in the lock, into his own
pocket.

“I have no authority to go through these papers. But it should be
done—at once!”

He then made a very careful examination of the drawers of the
wash-stand. Crossing the room to the left-hand window, a round stain,
hardly visible on the dark brown carpet, seemed to interest him
particularly. He went down on his knees, examining it minutely—even
going so far as to smell it.

Finally, he poured a few drops of the cocoa into a test tube, sealing
it up carefully. His next proceeding was to take out a little notebook.

“We have found in this room,” he said, writing busily, “six points of
interest. Shall I enumerate them, or will you?”

“Oh, you,” I replied hastily.

“Very well, then. One, a coffee-cup that has been ground into powder;
two, a despatch-case with a key in the lock; three, a stain on the
floor.”

“That may have been done some time ago,” I interrupted.

“No, for it is still perceptibly damp and smells of coffee. Four, a
fragment of some dark green fabric—only a thread or two, but
recognizable.”

“Ah!” I cried. “That was what you sealed up in the envelope.”

“Yes. It may turn out to be a piece of one of Mrs. Inglethorp’s own
dresses, and quite unimportant. We shall see. Five, _this_!” With a
dramatic gesture, he pointed to a large splash of candle grease on the
floor by the writing-table. “It must have been done since yesterday,
otherwise a good housemaid would have at once removed it with
blotting-paper and a hot iron. One of my best hats once—but that is not
to the point.”

“It was very likely done last night. We were very agitated. Or perhaps
Mrs. Inglethorp herself dropped her candle.”

“You brought only one candle into the room?”

“Yes. Lawrence Cavendish was carrying it. But he was very upset. He
seemed to see something over here”—I indicated the mantelpiece—“that
absolutely paralysed him.”

“That is interesting,” said Poirot quickly. “Yes, it is suggestive”—his
eye sweeping the whole length of the wall—“but it was not his candle
that made this great patch, for you perceive that this is white grease;
whereas Monsieur Lawrence’s candle, which is still on the
dressing-table, is pink. On the other hand, Mrs. Inglethorp had no
candlestick in the room, only a reading-lamp.”

“Then,” I said, “what do you deduce?”

To which my friend only made a rather irritating reply, urging me to
use my own natural faculties.

“And the sixth point?” I asked. “I suppose it is the sample of cocoa.”

“No,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “I might have included that in the six,
but I did not. No, the sixth point I will keep to myself for the
present.”

He looked quickly round the room. “There is nothing more to be done
here, I think, unless”—he stared earnestly and long at the dead ashes
in the grate. “The fire burns—and it destroys. But by chance—there
might be—let us see!”

Deftly, on hands and knees, he began to sort the ashes from the grate
into the fender, handling them with the greatest caution. Suddenly, he
gave a faint exclamation.

“The forceps, Hastings!”

I quickly handed them to him, and with skill he extracted a small piece
of half charred paper.

“There, _mon ami!_” he cried. “What do you think of that?”

I scrutinized the fragment. This is an exact reproduction of it:—




       03


I was puzzled. It was unusually thick, quite unlike ordinary notepaper.
Suddenly an idea struck me.

“Poirot!” I cried. “This is a fragment of a will!”

“Exactly.”

I looked up at him sharply.

“You are not surprised?”

“No,” he said gravely, “I expected it.”

I relinquished the piece of paper, and watched him put it away in his
case, with the same methodical care that he bestowed on everything. My
brain was in a whirl. What was this complication of a will? Who had
destroyed it? The person who had left the candle grease on the floor?
Obviously. But how had anyone gained admission? All the doors had been
bolted on the inside.

“Now, my friend,” said Poirot briskly, “we will go. I should like to
ask a few questions of the parlourmaid—Dorcas, her name is, is it not?”

We passed through Alfred Inglethorp’s room, and Poirot delayed long
enough to make a brief but fairly comprehensive examination of it. We
went out through that door, locking both it and that of Mrs.
Inglethorp’s room as before.

I took him down to the boudoir which he had expressed a wish to see,
and went myself in search of Dorcas.

When I returned with her, however, the boudoir was empty.

“Poirot,” I cried, “where are you?”

“I am here, my friend.”

He had stepped outside the French window, and was standing, apparently
lost in admiration, before the various shaped flower beds.

“Admirable!” he murmured. “Admirable! What symmetry! Observe that
crescent; and those diamonds—their neatness rejoices the eye. The
spacing of the plants, also, is perfect. It has been recently done; is
it not so?”

“Yes, I believe they were at it yesterday afternoon. But come in—Dorcas
is here.”

“_Eh bien, eh bien!_ Do not grudge me a moment’s satisfaction of the
eye.”

“Yes, but this affair is more important.”

“And how do you know that these fine begonias are not of equal
importance?”

I shrugged my shoulders. There was really no arguing with him if he
chose to take that line.

“You do not agree? But such things have been. Well, we will come in and
interview the brave Dorcas.”

Dorcas was standing in the boudoir, her hands folded in front of her,
and her grey hair rose in stiff waves under her white cap. She was the
very model and picture of a good old-fashioned servant.

In her attitude towards Poirot, she was inclined to be suspicious, but
he soon broke down her defences. He drew forward a chair.

“Pray be seated, mademoiselle.”

“Thank you, sir.”

“You have been with your mistress many years, is it not so?”

“Ten years, sir.”

“That is a long time, and very faithful service. You were much attached
to her, were you not?”

“She was a very good mistress to me, sir.”

“Then you will not object to answering a few questions. I put them to
you with Mr. Cavendish’s full approval.”

“Oh, certainly, sir.”

“Then I will begin by asking you about the events of yesterday
afternoon. Your mistress had a quarrel?”

“Yes, sir. But I don’t know that I ought——” Dorcas hesitated.

Poirot looked at her keenly.

“My good Dorcas, it is necessary that I should know every detail of
that quarrel as fully as possible. Do not think that you are betraying
your mistress’s secrets. Your mistress lies dead, and it is necessary
that we should know all—if we are to avenge her. Nothing can bring her
back to life, but we do hope, if there has been foul play, to bring the
murderer to justice.”

“Amen to that,” said Dorcas fiercely. “And, naming no names, there’s
_one_ in this house that none of us could ever abide! And an ill day it
was when first _he_ darkened the threshold.”

Poirot waited for her indignation to subside, and then, resuming his
business-like tone, he asked:

“Now, as to this quarrel? What is the first you heard of it?”

“Well, sir, I happened to be going along the hall outside yesterday——”

“What time was that?”

“I couldn’t say exactly, sir, but it wasn’t tea-time by a long way.
Perhaps four o’clock—or it may have been a bit later. Well, sir, as I
said, I happened to be passing along, when I heard voices very loud and
angry in here. I didn’t exactly mean to listen, but—well, there it is.
I stopped. The door was shut, but the mistress was speaking very sharp
and clear, and I heard what she said quite plainly. ‘You have lied to
me, and deceived me,’ she said. I didn’t hear what Mr. Inglethorp
replied. He spoke a good bit lower than she did—but she answered: ‘How
dare you? I have kept you and clothed you and fed you! You owe
everything to me! And this is how you repay me! By bringing disgrace
upon our name!’ Again I didn’t hear what he said, but she went on:
‘Nothing that you can say will make any difference. I see my duty
clearly. My mind is made up. You need not think that any fear of
publicity, or scandal between husband and wife will deter me.’ Then I
thought I heard them coming out, so I went off quickly.”

“You are sure it was Mr. Inglethorp’s voice you heard?”

“Oh, yes, sir, whose else’s could it be?”

“Well, what happened next?”

“Later, I came back to the hall; but it was all quiet. At five o’clock,
Mrs. Inglethorp rang the bell and told me to bring her a cup of
tea—nothing to eat—to the boudoir. She was looking dreadful—so white
and upset. ‘Dorcas,’ she says, ‘I’ve had a great shock.’ ‘I’m sorry for
that, m’m,’ I says. ‘You’ll feel better after a nice hot cup of tea,
m’m.’ She had something in her hand. I don’t know if it was a letter,
or just a piece of paper, but it had writing on it, and she kept
staring at it, almost as if she couldn’t believe what was written
there. She whispered to herself, as though she had forgotten I was
there: ‘These few words—and everything’s changed.’ And then she says to
me: ‘Never trust a man, Dorcas, they’re not worth it!’ I hurried off,
and got her a good strong cup of tea, and she thanked me, and said
she’d feel better when she’d drunk it. ‘I don’t know what to do,’ she
says. ‘Scandal between husband and wife is a dreadful thing, Dorcas.
I’d rather hush it up if I could.’ Mrs. Cavendish came in just then, so
she didn’t say any more.”

“She still had the letter, or whatever it was, in her hand?”



“Yes, sir.”

“What would she be likely to do with it afterwards?”

“Well, I don’t know, sir, I expect she would lock it up in that purple
case of hers.”

“Is that where she usually kept important papers?”

“Yes, sir. She brought it down with her every morning, and took it up
every night.”

“When did she lose the key of it?”

“She missed it yesterday at lunch-time, sir, and told me to look
carefully for it. She was very much put out about it.”

“But she had a duplicate key?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

Dorcas was looking very curiously at him and, to tell the truth, so was
I. What was all this about a lost key? Poirot smiled.

“Never mind, Dorcas, it is my business to know things. Is this the key
that was lost?” He drew from his pocket the key that he had found in
the lock of the despatch-case upstairs.

Dorcas’s eyes looked as though they would pop out of her head.

“That’s it, sir, right enough. But where did you find it? I looked
everywhere for it.”

“Ah, but you see it was not in the same place yesterday as it was
to-day. Now, to pass to another subject, had your mistress a dark green
dress in her wardrobe?”

Dorcas was rather startled by the unexpected question.

“No, sir.”

“Are you quite sure?”

“Oh, yes, sir.”

“Has anyone else in the house got a green dress?”

Dorcas reflected.

“Miss Cynthia has a green evening dress.”

“Light or dark green?”

“A light green, sir; a sort of chiffon, they call it.”

“Ah, that is not what I want. And nobody else has anything green?”

“No, sir—not that I know of.”

Poirot’s face did not betray a trace of whether he was disappointed or
otherwise. He merely remarked:

“Good, we will leave that and pass on. Have you any reason to believe
that your mistress was likely to take a sleeping powder last night?”

“Not _last_ night, sir, I know she didn’t.”

“Why do you know so positively?”

“Because the box was empty. She took the last one two days ago, and she
didn’t have any more made up.”

“You are quite sure of that?”

“Positive, sir.”

“Then that is cleared up! By the way, your mistress didn’t ask you to
sign any paper yesterday?”

“To sign a paper? No, sir.”

“When Mr. Hastings and Mr. Lawrence came in yesterday evening, they
found your mistress busy writing letters. I suppose you can give me no
idea to whom these letters were addressed?”

“I’m afraid I couldn’t, sir. I was out in the evening. Perhaps Annie
could tell you, though she’s a careless girl. Never cleared the
coffee-cups away last night. That’s what happens when I’m not here to
look after things.”

Poirot lifted his hand.

“Since they have been left, Dorcas, leave them a little longer, I pray
you. I should like to examine them.”

“Very well, sir.”

“What time did you go out last evening?”

“About six o’clock, sir.”

“Thank you, Dorcas, that is all I have to ask you.” He rose and
strolled to the window. “I have been admiring these flower beds. How
many gardeners are employed here, by the way?”

“Only three now, sir. Five, we had, before the war, when it was kept as
a gentleman’s place should be. I wish you could have seen it then, sir.
A fair sight it was. But now there’s only old Manning, and young
William, and a new-fashioned woman gardener in breeches and such-like.
Ah, these are dreadful times!”

“The good times will come again, Dorcas. At least, we hope so. Now,
will you send Annie to me here?”

“Yes, sir. Thank you, sir.”

“How did you know that Mrs. Inglethorp took sleeping powders?” I asked,
in lively curiosity, as Dorcas left the room. “And about the lost key
and the duplicate?”

“One thing at a time. As to the sleeping powders, I knew by this.” He
suddenly produced a small cardboard box, such as chemists use for
powders.

“Where did you find it?”

“In the wash-stand drawer in Mrs. Inglethorp’s bedroom. It was Number
Six of my catalogue.”

“But I suppose, as the last powder was taken two days ago, it is not of
much importance?”

“Probably not, but do you notice anything that strikes you as peculiar
about this box?”

I examined it closely.

“No, I can’t say that I do.”

“Look at the label.”

I read the label carefully: “‘One powder to be taken at bedtime, if
required. Mrs. Inglethorp.’ No, I see nothing unusual.”

“Not the fact that there is no chemist’s name?”

“Ah!” I exclaimed. “To be sure, that is odd!”

“Have you ever known a chemist to send out a box like that, without his
printed name?”

“No, I can’t say that I have.”

I was becoming quite excited, but Poirot damped my ardour by remarking:

“Yet the explanation is quite simple. So do not intrigue yourself, my
friend.”

An audible creaking proclaimed the approach of Annie, so I had no time
to reply.

Annie was a fine, strapping girl, and was evidently labouring under
intense excitement, mingled with a certain ghoulish enjoyment of the
tragedy.

Poirot came to the point at once, with a business-like briskness.

“I sent for you, Annie, because I thought you might be able to tell me
something about the letters Mrs. Inglethorp wrote last night. How many
were there? And can you tell me any of the names and addresses?”

Annie considered.

“There were four letters, sir. One was to Miss Howard, and one was to
Mr. Wells, the lawyer, and the other two I don’t think I remember,
sir—oh, yes, one was to Ross’s, the caterers in Tadminster. The other
one, I don’t remember.”

“Think,” urged Poirot.

Annie racked her brains in vain.

“I’m sorry, sir, but it’s clean gone. I don’t think I can have noticed
it.”

“It does not matter,” said Poirot, not betraying any sign of
disappointment. “Now I want to ask you about something else. There is a
saucepan in Mrs. Inglethorp’s room with some cocoa in it. Did she have
that every night?”

“Yes, sir, it was put in her room every evening, and she warmed it up
in the night—whenever she fancied it.”

“What was it? Plain cocoa?”

“Yes, sir, made with milk, with a teaspoonful of sugar, and two
teaspoonfuls of rum in it.”

“Who took it to her room?”

“I did, sir.”

“Always?”

“Yes, sir.”

“At what time?”

“When I went to draw the curtains, as a rule, sir.”

“Did you bring it straight up from the kitchen then?”

“No, sir, you see there’s not much room on the gas stove, so cook used
to make it early, before putting the vegetables on for supper. Then I
used to bring it up, and put it on the table by the swing door, and
take it into her room later.”

“The swing door is in the left wing, is it not?”

“Yes, sir.”

“And the table, is it on this side of the door, or on the
farther—servants’ side?”

“It’s this side, sir.”

“What time did you bring it up last night?”

“About quarter-past seven, I should say, sir.”

“And when did you take it into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room?”

“When I went to shut up, sir. About eight o’clock. Mrs. Inglethorp came
up to bed before I’d finished.”

“Then, between seven-fifteen and eight o’clock, the cocoa was standing
on the table in the left wing?”

“Yes, sir.” Annie had been growing redder and redder in the face, and
now she blurted out unexpectedly:

“And if there _was_ salt in it, sir, it wasn’t me. I never took the
salt near it.”

“What makes you think there was salt in it?” asked Poirot.

“Seeing it on the tray, sir.”

“You saw some salt on the tray?”

“Yes. Coarse kitchen salt, it looked. I never noticed it when I took
the tray up, but when I came to take it into the mistress’s room I saw
it at once, and I suppose I ought to have taken it down again, and
asked cook to make some fresh. But I was in a hurry, because Dorcas was
out, and I thought maybe the cocoa itself was all right, and the salt
had only gone on the tray. So I dusted it off with my apron, and took
it in.”

I had the utmost difficulty in controlling my excitement. Unknown to
herself, Annie had provided us with an important piece of evidence. How
she would have gaped if she had realized that her “coarse kitchen salt”
was strychnine, one of the most deadly poisons known to mankind. I
marvelled at Poirot’s calm. His self-control was astonishing. I awaited
his next question with impatience, but it disappointed me.

“When you went into Mrs. Inglethorp’s room, was the door leading into
Miss Cynthia’s room bolted?”

“Oh! Yes, sir; it always was. It had never been opened.”

“And the door into Mr. Inglethorp’s room? Did you notice if that was
bolted too?”

Annie hesitated.

“I couldn’t rightly say, sir; it was shut but I couldn’t say whether it
was bolted or not.”

“When you finally left the room, did Mrs. Inglethorp bolt the door
after you?”

“No, sir, not then, but I expect she did later. She usually did lock it
at night. The door into the passage, that is.”

“Did you notice any candle grease on the floor when you did the room
yesterday?”

“Candle grease? Oh, no, sir. Mrs. Inglethorp didn’t have a candle, only
a reading-lamp.”

“Then, if there had been a large patch of candle grease on the floor,
you think you would have been sure to have seen it?”

“Yes, sir, and I would have taken it out with a piece of blotting-paper
and a hot iron.”

Then Poirot repeated the question he had put to Dorcas:

“Did your mistress ever have a green dress?”

“No, sir.”

“Nor a mantle, nor a cape, nor a—how do you call it?—a sports coat?”

“Not green, sir.”

“Nor anyone else in the house?”

Annie reflected.

“No, sir.”

“You are sure of that?”

“Quite sure.”

“_Bien!_ That is all I want to know. Thank you very much.”

With a nervous giggle, Annie took herself creakingly out of the room.
My pent-up excitement burst forth.

“Poirot,” I cried, “I congratulate you! This is a great discovery.”

“What is a great discovery?”

“Why, that it was the cocoa and not the coffee that was poisoned. That
explains everything! Of course it did not take effect until the early
morning, since the cocoa was only drunk in the middle of the night.”

“So you think that the cocoa—mark well what I say, Hastings, the
_cocoa_—contained strychnine?”

“Of course! That salt on the tray, what else could it have been?”

“It might have been salt,” replied Poirot placidly.

I shrugged my shoulders. If he was going to take the matter that way,
it was no good arguing with him. The idea crossed my mind, not for the
first time, that poor old Poirot was growing old. Privately I thought
it lucky that he had associated with him someone of a more receptive
type of mind.

Poirot was surveying me with quietly twinkling eyes.

“You are not pleased with me, _mon ami?_”

“My dear Poirot,” I said coldly, “it is not for me to dictate to you.
You have a right to your own opinion, just as I have to mine.”

“A most admirable sentiment,” remarked Poirot, rising briskly to his
feet. “Now I have finished with this room. By the way, whose is the
smaller desk in the corner?”

“Mr. Inglethorp’s.”

“Ah!” He tried the roll top tentatively. “Locked. But perhaps one of
Mrs. Inglethorp’s keys would open it.” He tried several, twisting and
turning them with a practiced hand, and finally uttering an ejaculation
of satisfaction. “_Voilà!_ It is not the key, but it will open it at a
pinch.” He slid back the roll top, and ran a rapid eye over the neatly
filed papers. To my surprise, he did not examine them, merely remarking
approvingly as he relocked the desk: “Decidedly, he is a man of method,
this Mr. Inglethorp!”

A “man of method” was, in Poirot’s estimation, the highest praise that
could be bestowed on any individual.

I felt that my friend was not what he had been as he rambled on
disconnectedly:

“There were no stamps in his desk, but there might have been, eh, _mon
ami?_ There might have been? Yes”—his eyes wandered round the
room—“this boudoir has nothing more to tell us. It did not yield much.
Only this.”

He pulled a crumpled envelope out of his pocket, and tossed it over to
me. It was rather a curious document. A plain, dirty looking old
envelope with a few words scrawled across it, apparently at random. The
following is a facsimile of it.




       04








CHAPTER V. “IT ISN’T STRYCHNINE, IS IT?”

“Where did you find this?” I asked Poirot, in lively curiosity.

“In the waste-paper basket. You recognise the handwriting?”

“Yes, it is Mrs. Inglethorp’s. But what does it mean?”

Poirot shrugged his shoulders.

“I cannot say—but it is suggestive.”

A wild idea flashed across me. Was it possible that Mrs. Inglethorp’s
mind was deranged? Had she some fantastic idea of demoniacal
possession? And, if that were so, was it not also possible that she
might have taken her own life?

I was about to expound these theories to Poirot, when his own words
distracted me.

“Come,” he said, “now to examine the coffee-cups!”

“My dear Poirot! What on earth is the good of that, now that we know
about the cocoa?”

“Oh, _là là!_ That miserable cocoa!” cried Poirot flippantly.

He laughed with apparent enjoyment, raising his arms to heaven in mock
despair, in what I could not but consider the worst possible taste.

“And, anyway,” I said, with increasing coldness, “as Mrs. Inglethorp
took her coffee upstairs with her, I do not see what you expect to
find, unless you consider it likely that we shall discover a packet of
strychnine on the coffee tray!”

Poirot was sobered at once.

“Come, come, my friend,” he said, slipping his arms through mine. “_Ne
vous fâchez pas!_ Allow me to interest myself in my coffee-cups, and I
will respect your cocoa. There! Is it a bargain?”

He was so quaintly humorous that I was forced to laugh; and we went
together to the drawing-room, where the coffee-cups and tray remained
undisturbed as we had left them.

Poirot made me recapitulate the scene of the night before, listening
very carefully, and verifying the position of the various cups.

“So Mrs. Cavendish stood by the tray—and poured out. Yes. Then she came
across to the window where you sat with Mademoiselle Cynthia. Yes. Here
are the three cups. And the cup on the mantelpiece, half drunk, that
would be Mr. Lawrence Cavendish’s. And the one on the tray?”

“John Cavendish’s. I saw him put it down there.”

“Good. One, two, three, four, five—but where, then, is the cup of Mr.
Inglethorp?”

“He does not take coffee.”

“Then all are accounted for. One moment, my friend.”

With infinite care, he took a drop or two from the grounds in each cup,
sealing them up in separate test tubes, tasting each in turn as he did
so. His physiognomy underwent a curious change. An expression gathered
there that I can only describe as half puzzled, and half relieved.

“_Bien!_” he said at last. “It is evident! I had an idea—but clearly I
was mistaken. Yes, altogether I was mistaken. Yet it is strange. But no
matter!”

And, with a characteristic shrug, he dismissed whatever it was that was
worrying him from his mind. I could have told him from the beginning
that this obsession of his over the coffee was bound to end in a blind
alley, but I restrained my tongue. After all, though he was old, Poirot
had been a great man in his day.

“Breakfast is ready,” said John Cavendish, coming in from the hall.
“You will breakfast with us, Monsieur Poirot?”

Poirot acquiesced. I observed John. Already he was almost restored to
his normal self. The shock of the events of the last night had upset
him temporarily, but his equable poise soon swung back to the normal.
He was a man of very little imagination, in sharp contrast with his
brother, who had, perhaps, too much.

Ever since the early hours of the morning, John had been hard at work,
sending telegrams—one of the first had gone to Evelyn Howard—writing
notices for the papers, and generally occupying himself with the
melancholy duties that a death entails.

“May I ask how things are proceeding?” he said. “Do your investigations
point to my mother having died a natural death—or—or must we prepare
ourselves for the worst?”

“I think, Mr. Cavendish,” said Poirot gravely, “that you would do well
not to buoy yourself up with any false hopes. Can you tell me the views
of the other members of the family?”

“My brother Lawrence is convinced that we are making a fuss over
nothing. He says that everything points to its being a simple case of
heart failure.”

“He does, does he? That is very interesting—very interesting,” murmured
Poirot softly. “And Mrs. Cavendish?”

A faint cloud passed over John’s face.

“I have not the least idea what my wife’s views on the subject are.”

The answer brought a momentary stiffness in its train. John broke the
rather awkward silence by saying with a slight effort:

“I told you, didn’t I, that Mr. Inglethorp has returned?”

Poirot bent his head.

“It’s an awkward position for all of us. Of course one has to treat him
as usual—but, hang it all, one’s gorge does rise at sitting down to eat
with a possible murderer!”

Poirot nodded sympathetically.

“I quite understand. It is a very difficult situation for you, Mr.
Cavendish. I would like to ask you one question. Mr. Inglethorp’s
reason for not returning last night was, I believe, that he had
forgotten the latch-key. Is not that so?”

“Yes.”

“I suppose you are quite sure that the latch-key _was_ forgotten—that
he did not take it after all?”

“I have no idea. I never thought of looking. We always keep it in the
hall drawer. I’ll go and see if it’s there now.”

Poirot held up his hand with a faint smile.

“No, no, Mr. Cavendish, it is too late now. I am certain that you would
find it. If Mr. Inglethorp did take it, he has had ample time to
replace it by now.”

“But do you think——”

“I think nothing. If anyone had chanced to look this morning before his
return, and seen it there, it would have been a valuable point in his
favour. That is all.”

John looked perplexed.

“Do not worry,” said Poirot smoothly. “I assure you that you need not
let it trouble you. Since you are so kind, let us go and have some
breakfast.”

Everyone was assembled in the dining-room. Under the circumstances, we
were naturally not a cheerful party. The reaction after a shock is
always trying, and I think we were all suffering from it. Decorum and
good breeding naturally enjoined that our demeanour should be much as
usual, yet I could not help wondering if this self-control were really
a matter of great difficulty. There were no red eyes, no signs of
secretly indulged grief. I felt that I was right in my opinion that
Dorcas was the person most affected by the personal side of the
tragedy.

I pass over Alfred Inglethorp, who acted the bereaved widower in a
manner that I felt to be disgusting in its hypocrisy. Did he know that
we suspected him, I wondered. Surely he could not be unaware of the
fact, conceal it as we would. Did he feel some secret stirring of fear,
or was he confident that his crime would go unpunished? Surely the
suspicion in the atmosphere must warn him that he was already a marked
man.

But did everyone suspect him? What about Mrs. Cavendish? I watched her
as she sat at the head of the table, graceful, composed, enigmatic. In
her soft grey frock, with white ruffles at the wrists falling over her
slender hands, she looked very beautiful. When she chose, however, her
face could be sphinx-like in its inscrutability. She was very silent,
hardly opening her lips, and yet in some queer way I felt that the
great strength of her personality was dominating us all.

And little Cynthia? Did she suspect? She looked very tired and ill, I
thought. The heaviness and languor of her manner were very marked. I
asked her if she were feeling ill, and she answered frankly:

“Yes, I’ve got the most beastly headache.”

“Have another cup of coffee, mademoiselle?” said Poirot solicitously.
“It will revive you. It is unparalleled for the _mal de tête_.” He
jumped up and took her cup.

“No sugar,” said Cynthia, watching him, as he picked up the
sugar-tongs.

“No sugar? You abandon it in the war-time, eh?”

“No, I never take it in coffee.”

“_Sacré!_” murmured Poirot to himself, as he brought back the
replenished cup.

Only I heard him, and glancing up curiously at the little man I saw
that his face was working with suppressed excitement, and his eyes were
as green as a cat’s. He had heard or seen something that had affected
him strongly—but what was it? I do not usually label myself as dense,
but I must confess that nothing out of the ordinary had attracted _my_
attention.

In another moment, the door opened and Dorcas appeared.

“Mr. Wells to see you, sir,” she said to John.

I remembered the name as being that of the lawyer to whom Mrs.
Inglethorp had written the night before.

John rose immediately.

“Show him into my study.” Then he turned to us. “My mother’s lawyer,”
he explained. And in a lower voice: “He is also Coroner—you understand.
Perhaps you would like to come with me?”

We acquiesced and followed him out of the room. John strode on ahead
and I took the opportunity of whispering to Poirot:

“There will be an inquest then?”

Poirot nodded absently. He seemed absorbed in thought; so much so that
my curiosity was aroused.

“What is it? You are not attending to what I say.”

“It is true, my friend. I am much worried.”
tragedy.

I pass over Alfred Inglethorp, who acted the bereaved widower in a
manner that I felt to be disgusting in its hypocrisy. Did he know that
we suspected him, I wondered. Surely he could not be unaware of the
fact, conceal it as we would. Did he feel some secret stirring of fear,
or was he confident that his crime would go unpunished? Surely the
suspicion in the atmosphere must warn him that he was already a marked
man.

But did everyone suspect him? What about Mrs. Cavendish? I watched her
as she sat at the head of the table, graceful, composed, enigmatic. In
her soft grey frock, with white ruffles at the wrists falling over her
slender hands, she looked very beautiful. When she chose, however, her
face could be sphinx-like in its inscrutability. She was very silent,
hardly opening her lips, and yet in some queer way I felt that the
great strength of her personality was dominating us all.

And little Cynthia? Did she suspect? She looked very tired and ill, I
thought. The heaviness and languor of her manner were very marked. I
asked her if she were feeling ill, and she answered frankly:

“Yes, I’ve got the most beastly headache.”

“Have another cup of coffee, mademoiselle?” said Poirot solicitously.
“It will revive you. It is unparalleled for the _mal de tête_.” He
jumped up and took her cup.

“No sugar,” said Cynthia, watching him, as he picked up the
sugar-tongs.

“No sugar? You abandon it in the war-time, eh?”

“No, I never take it in coffee.”

“_Sacré!_” murmured Poirot to himself, as he brought back the
replenished cup.

Only I heard him, and glancing up curiously at the little man I saw
that his face was working with suppressed excitement, and his eyes were
as green as a cat’s. He had heard or seen something that had affected
him strongly—but what was it? I do not usually label myself as dense,
but I must confess that nothing out of the ordinary had attracted _my_
attention.

In another moment, the door opened and Dorcas appeared.

“Mr. Wells to see you, sir,” she said to John.

I remembered the name as being that of the lawyer to whom Mrs.
Inglethorp had written the night before.

John rose immediately.

“Show him into my study.” Then he turned to us. “My mother’s lawyer,”
he explained. And in a lower voice: “He is also Coroner—you understand.
Perhaps you would like to come with me?”

We acquiesced and followed him out of the room. John strode on ahead
and I took the opportunity of whispering to Poirot:

“There will be an inquest then?”

Poirot nodded absently. He seemed absorbed in thought; so much so that
my curiosity was aroused.

“What is it? You are not attending to what I say.”

“It is true, my friend. I am much worried.”
tragedy.

I pass over Alfred Inglethorp, who acted the bereaved widower in a
manner that I felt to be disgusting in its hypocrisy. Did he know that
we suspected him, I wondered. Surely he could not be unaware of the
fact, conceal it as we would. Did he feel some secret stirring of fear,
or was he confident that his crime would go unpunished? Surely the
suspicion in the atmosphere must warn him that he was already a marked
man.

But did everyone suspect him? What about Mrs. Cavendish? I watched her
as she sat at the head of the table, graceful, composed, enigmatic. In
her soft grey frock, with white ruffles at the wrists falling over her
slender hands, she looked very beautiful. When she chose, however, her
face could be sphinx-like in its inscrutability. She was very silent,
hardly opening her lips, and yet in some queer way I felt that the
great strength of her personality was dominating us all.

And little Cynthia? Did she suspect? She looked very tired and ill, I
thought. The heaviness and languor of her manner were very marked. I
asked her if she were feeling ill, and she answered frankly:

“Yes, I’ve got the most beastly headache.”

“Have another cup of coffee, mademoiselle?” said Poirot solicitously.
“It will revive you. It is unparalleled for the _mal de tête_.” He
jumped up and took her cup.

“No sugar,” said Cynthia, watching him, as he picked up the
sugar-tongs.

“No sugar? You abandon it in the war-time, eh?”

“No, I never take it in coffee.”

“_Sacré!_” murmured Poirot to himself, as he brought back the
replenished cup.

Only I heard him, and glancing up curiously at the little man I saw
that his face was working with suppressed excitement, and his eyes were
as green as a cat’s. He had heard or seen something that had affected
him strongly—but what was it? I do not usually label myself as dense,
but I must confess that nothing out of the ordinary had attracted _my_
attention.

In another moment, the door opened and Dorcas appeared.

“Mr. Wells to see you, sir,” she said to John.

I remembered the name as being that of the lawyer to whom Mrs.
Inglethorp had written the night before.

John rose immediately.

“Show him into my study.” Then he turned to us. “My mother’s lawyer,”
he explained. And in a lower voice: “He is also Coroner—you understand.
Perhaps you would like to come with me?”

We acquiesced and followed him out of the room. John strode on ahead
and I took the opportunity of whispering to Poirot:

“There will be an inquest then?”

Poirot nodded absently. He seemed absorbed in thought; so much so that
my curiosity was aroused.

“What is it? You are not attending to what I say.”

“It is true, my friend. I am much worried.”
HAPTER II. THE 16TH AND 17TH OF JULY

I had arrived at Styles on the 5th of July. I come now to the events of
the 16th and 17th of that month. For the convenience of the reader I
will recapitulate the incidents of those days in as exact a manner as
possible. They were elicited subsequently at the trial by a process of
long and tedious cross-examinations.

I received a letter from Evelyn Howard a couple of days after her
departure, telling me she was working as a nurse at the big hospital in
Middlingham, a manufacturing town some fifteen miles away, and begging
me to let her know if Mrs. Inglethorp should show any wish to be
reconciled.

The only fly in the ointment of my peaceful days was Mrs. Cavendish’s
extraordinary, and, for my part, unaccountable preference for the
society of Dr. Bauerstein. What she saw in the man I cannot imagine,
but she was always asking him up to the house, and often went off for
long expeditions with him. I must confess that I was quite unable to
see his attraction.

The 16th of July fell on a Monday. It was a day of turmoil. The famous
bazaar had taken place on Saturday, and an entertainment, in connection
with the same charity, at which Mrs. Inglethorp was to recite a War
poem, was to be held that night. We were all busy during the morning
arranging and decorating the Hall in the village where it was to take
place. We had a late luncheon and spent the afternoon resting in the
garden. I noticed that John’s manner was somewhat unusual. He seemed
very excited and restless.

After tea, Mrs. Inglethorp went to lie down to rest before her efforts
in the evening and I challenged Mary Cavendish to a single at tennis.

About a quarter to seven, Mrs. Inglethorp called us that we should be
late as supper was early that night. We had rather a scramble to get
ready in time; and before the meal was over the motor was waiting at
the door.

The entertainment was a great success, Mrs. Inglethorp’s recitation
receiving tremendous applause. There were also some tableaux in which
Cynthia took part. She did not return with us, having been asked to a
supper party, and to remain the night with some friends who had been
acting with her in the tableaux.

The following morning, Mrs. Inglethorp stayed in bed to breakfast, as
she was rather overtired; but she appeared in her briskest mood about
12.30, and swept Lawrence and myself off to a luncheon party.

“Such a charming invitation from Mrs. Rolleston. Lady Tadminster’s
sister, you know. The Rollestons came over with the Conqueror—one of
our oldest families.”

Mary had excused herself on the plea of an engagement with Dr.
Bauerstein.

We had a pleasant luncheon, and as we drove away Lawrence suggested
that we should return by Tadminster, which was barely a mile out of our
way, and pay a visit to Cynthia in her dispensary. Mrs. Inglethorp
replied that this was an excellent idea, but as she had several letters
to write she would drop us there, and we could come back with Cynthia
in the pony-trap.

We were detained under suspicion by the hospital porter, until Cynthia
appeared to vouch for us, looking very cool and sweet in her long white
overall. She took us up to her sanctum, and introduced us to her fellow
dispenser, a rather awe-inspiring individual, whom Cynthia cheerily
addressed as “Nibs.”

“What a lot of bottles!” I exclaimed, as my eye travelled round the
small room. “Do you really know what’s in them all?”

“Say something original,” groaned Cynthia. “Every single person who
comes up here says that. We are really thinking of bestowing a prize on
the first individual who does _not_ say: ‘What a lot of bottles!’ And I
know the next thing you’re going to say is: ‘How many people have you
poisoned?’”

I pleaded guilty with a laugh.

“If you people only knew how fatally easy it is to poison someone by
mistake, you wouldn’t joke about it. Come on, let’s have tea. We’ve got
all sorts of secret stories in that cupboard. No, Lawrence—that’s the
poison cupboard. The big cupboard—that’s right.”

We had a very cheery tea, and assisted Cynthia to wash up afterwards.
We had just put away the last tea-spoon when a knock came at the door.
The countenances of Cynthia and Nibs were suddenly petrified into a
stern and forbidding expression.

“Come in,” said Cynthia, in a sharp professional tone.

A young and rather scared looking nurse appeared with a bottle which
she proffered to Nibs, who waved her towards Cynthia with the somewhat
enigmatical remark:

“_I_’m not really here to-day.”

Cynthia took the bottle and examined it with the severity of a judge.

“This should have been sent up this morning.”

“Sister is very sorry. She forgot.”

“Sister should read the rules outside the door.”

I gathered from the little nurse’s expression that there was not the
least likelihood of her having the hardihood to retail this message to
the dreaded “Sister”.

“So now it can’t be done until to-morrow,” finished Cynthia.

“Don’t you think you could possibly let us have it to-night?”

“Well,” said Cynthia graciously, “we are very busy, but if we have time
it shall be done.”

The little nurse withdrew, and Cynthia promptly took a jar from the
shelf, refilled the bottle, and placed it on the table outside the
door.

I laughed.

“Discipline must be maintained?”

“Exactly. Come out on our little balcony. You can see all the outside
wards there.”

I followed Cynthia and her friend and they pointed out the different
wards to me. Lawrence remained behind, but after a few moments Cynthia
called to him over her shoulder to come and join us. Then she looked at
her watch.

“Nothing more to do, Nibs?”

“No.”

“All right. Then we can lock up and go.”

I had seen Lawrence in quite a different light that afternoon. Compared
to John, he was an astoundingly difficult person to get to know. He was
the opposite of his brother in almost every respect, being unusually
shy and reserved. Yet he had a certain charm of manner, and I fancied
that, if one really knew him well, one could have a deep affection for
him. I had always fancied that his manner to Cynthia was rather
constrained, and that she on her side was inclined to be shy of him.
But they were both gay enough this afternoon, and chatted together like
a couple of children.

As we drove through the village, I remembered that I wanted some
stamps, so accordingly we pulled up at the post office.

As I came out again, I cannoned into a little man who was just
entering. I drew aside and apologised, when suddenly, with a loud
exclamation, he clasped me in his arms and kissed me warmly.

“_Mon ami_ Hastings!” he cried. “It is indeed _mon ami_ Hastings!”

“Poirot!” I exclaimed.

I turned to the pony-trap.

“This is a very pleasant meeting for me, Miss Cynthia. This is my old
friend, Monsieur Poirot, whom I have not seen for years.”

“Oh, we know Monsieur Poirot,” said Cynthia gaily. “But I had no idea
he was a friend of yours.”

“Yes, indeed,” said Poirot seriously. “I know Mademoiselle Cynthia. It
is by the charity of that good Mrs. Inglethorp that I am here.” Then,
as I looked at him inquiringly: “Yes, my friend, she had kindly
extended hospitality to seven of my countrypeople who, alas, are
refugees from their native land. We Belgians will always remember her
with gratitude.”

Poirot was an extraordinary looking little man. He was hardly more than
five feet, four inches, but carried himself with great dignity. His
head was exactly the shape of an egg, and he always perched it a little
on one side. His moustache was very stiff and military. The neatness of
his attire was almost incredible. I believe a speck of dust would have
caused him more pain than a bullet wound. Yet this quaint dandified
little man who, I was sorry to see, now limped badly, had been in his
time one of the most celebrated members of the Belgian police. As a
detective, his _flair_ had been extraordinary, and he had achieved
triumphs by unravelling some of the most baffling cases of the day.

He pointed out to me the little house inhabited by him and his fellow
Belgians, and I promised to go and see him at an early date. Then he
raised his hat with a flourish to Cynthia, and we drove away.

“He’s a dear little man,” said Cynthia. “I’d no idea you knew him.”

“You’ve been entertaining a celebrity unawares,” I replied.

And, for the rest of the way home, I recited to them the various
exploits and triumphs of Hercule Poirot.

We arrived back in a very cheerful mood. As we entered the hall, Mrs.
Inglethorp came out of her boudoir. She looked flushed and upset.

“Oh, it’s you,” she said.

“Is there anything the matter, Aunt Emily?” asked Cynthia.

“Certainly not,” said Mrs. Inglethorp sharply. “What should there be?”
Then catching sight of Dorcas, the parlourmaid, going into the
dining-room, she called to her to bring some stamps into the boudoir.

“Yes, m’m.” The old servant hesitated, then added diffidently: “Don’t
you think, m’m, you’d better get to bed? You’re looking very tired.”

“Perhaps you’re right, Dorcas—yes—no—not now. I’ve some letters I must
finish by post-time. Have you lighted the fire in my room as I told
you?”

“Yes, m’m.”

“Then I’ll go to bed directly after supper.”

She went into the boudoir again, and Cynthia stared after her.

“Goodness gracious! I wonder what’s up?” she said to Lawrence.

He did not seem to have heard her, for without a word he turned on his
heel and went out of the house.

I suggested a quick game of tennis before supper and, Cynthia agreeing,
I ran upstairs to fetch my racquet.

Mrs. Cavendish was coming down the stairs. It may have been my fancy,
but she, too, was looking odd and disturbed.

“Had a good walk with Dr. Bauerstein?” I asked, trying to appear as
indifferent as I could.

“I didn’t go,” she replied abruptly. “Where is Mrs. Inglethorp?”

“In the boudoir.”

Her hand clenched itself on the banisters, then she seemed to nerve
herself for some encounter, and went rapidly past me down the stairs
across the hall to the boudoir, the door of which she shut behind her.

As I ran out to the tennis court a few moments later, I had to pass the
open boudoir window, and was unable to help overhearing the following
scrap of dialogue. Mary Cavendish was saying in the voice of a woman
desperately controlling herself:

“Then you won’t show it to me?”

To which Mrs. Inglethorp replied:

“My dear Mary, it has nothing to do with that matter.”

“Then show it to me.”

“I tell you it is not what you imagine. It does not concern you in the
least.”

To which Mary Cavendish replied, with a rising bitterness:

“Of course, I might have known you would shield him.”

Cynthia was waiting for me, and greeted me eagerly with:

“I say! There’s been the most awful row! I’ve got it all out of
Dorcas.”

“What kind of a row?”

“Between Aunt Emily and _him_. I do hope she’s found him out at last!”

“Was Dorcas there, then?”

“Of course not. She ‘happened to be near the door’. It was a real old
bust-up. I do wish I knew what it was all about.”

I thought of Mrs. Raikes’s gipsy face, and Evelyn Howard’s warnings,
but wisely decided to hold my peace, whilst Cynthia exhausted every
possible hypothesis, and cheerfully hoped, “Aunt Emily will send him
away, and will never speak to him again.”

I was anxious to get hold of John, but he was nowhere to be seen.
Evidently something very momentous had occurred that afternoon. I tried
to forget the few words I had overheard; but, do what I would, I could
not dismiss them altogether from my mind. What was Mary Cavendish’s
concern in the matter?

Mr. Inglethorp was in the drawing-room when I came down to supper. His
face was impassive as ever, and the strange unreality of the man struck
me afresh.

Mrs. Inglethorp came down last. She still looked agitated, and during
the meal there was a somewhat constrained silence. Inglethorp was
unusually quiet. As a rule, he surrounded his wife with little
attentions, placing a cushion at her back, and altogether playing the
part of the devoted husband. Immediately after supper, Mrs. Inglethorp
retired to her boudoir again.

“Send my coffee in here, Mary,” she called. “I’ve just five minutes to
catch the post.”

Cynthia and I went and sat by the open window in the drawing-room. Mary
Cavendish brought our coffee to us. She seemed excited.

“Do you young people want lights, or do you enjoy the twilight?” she
asked. “Will you take Mrs. Inglethorp her coffee, Cynthia? I will pour
it out.”

“Do not trouble, Mary,” said Inglethorp. “I will take it to Emily.” He
poured it out, and went out of the room carrying it carefully.

Lawrence followed him, and Mrs. Cavendish sat down by us.

We three sat for some time in silence. It was a glorious night, hot and
still. Mrs. Cavendish fanned herself gently with a palm leaf.

“It’s almost too hot,” she murmured. “We shall have a thunderstorm.”

Alas, that these harmonious moments can never endure! My paradise was
rudely shattered by the sound of a well known, and heartily disliked,
voice in the hall.

“Dr. Bauerstein!” exclaimed Cynthia. “What a funny time to come.”

I glanced jealously at Mary Cavendish, but she seemed quite
undisturbed, the delicate pallor of her cheeks did not vary.

In a few moments, Alfred Inglethorp had ushered the doctor in, the
latter laughing, and protesting that he was in no fit state for a
drawing-room. In truth, he presented a sorry spectacle, being literally
plastered with mud.

“What have you been doing, doctor?” cried Mrs. Cavendish.

“I must make my apologies,” said the doctor. “I did not really mean to
come in, but Mr. Inglethorp insisted.”

“Well, Bauerstein, you are in a plight,” said John, strolling in from
the hall. “Have some coffee, and tell us what you have been up to.”

“Thank you, I will.” He laughed rather ruefully, as he described how he
had discovered a very rare species of fern in an inaccessible place,
and in his efforts to obtain it had lost his footing, and slipped
ignominiously into a neighbouring pond.

“The sun soon dried me off,” he added, “but I’m afraid my appearance is
very disreputable.”

At this juncture, Mrs. Inglethorp called to Cynthia from the hall, and
the girl ran out.

“Just carry up my despatch-case, will you, dear? I’m going to bed.”

The door into the hall was a wide one. I had risen when Cynthia did,
John was close by me. There were therefore three witnesses who could
swear that Mrs. Inglethorp was carrying her coffee, as yet untasted, in
her hand.

My evening was utterly and entirely spoilt by the presence of Dr.
Bauerstein. It seemed to me the man would never go. He rose at last,
however, and I breathed a sigh of relief.

“I’ll walk down to the village with you,” said Mr. Inglethorp. “I must
see our agent over those estate accounts.” He turned to John. “No one
need sit up. I will take the latch-key.”






CHAPTER III. THE NIGHT OF THE TRAGEDY

To make this part of my story clear, I append the following plan of the
first floor of Styles. The servants’ rooms are reached through the door
B. They have no communication with the right wing, where the
Inglethorps’ rooms were situated.




       01



It seemed to be the middle of the night when I was awakened by Lawrence
Cavendish. He had a candle in his hand, and the agitation of his face
told me at once that something was seriously wrong.

“What’s the matter?” I asked, sitting up in bed, and trying to collect
my scattered thoughts.

“We are afraid my mother is very ill. She seems to be having some kind
of fit. Unfortunately she has locked herself in.”

“I’ll come at once.”

I sprang out of bed; and, pulling on a dressing-gown, followed Lawrence
along the passage and the gallery to the right wing of the house.

John Cavendish joined us, and one or two of the servants were standing
round in a state of awe-stricken excitement. Lawrence turned to his
brother.

“What do you think we had better do?”

Never, I thought, had his indecision of character been more apparent.

John rattled the handle of Mrs. Inglethorp’s door violently, but with
no effect. It was obviously locked or bolted on the inside. The whole
household was aroused by now. The most alarming sounds were audible
from the interior of the room. Clearly something must be done.

“Try going through Mr. Inglethorp’s room, sir,” cried Dorcas. “Oh, the
poor mistress!”

Suddenly I realized that Alfred Inglethorp was not with us—that he
alone had given no sign of his presence. John opened the door of his
room. It was pitch dark, but Lawrence was following with the candle,
and by its feeble light we saw that the bed had not been slept in, and
that there was no sign of the room having been occupied.

We went straight to the connecting door. That, too, was locked or
bolted on the inside. What was to be done?

“Oh, dear, sir,” cried Dorcas, wringing her hands, “what ever shall we
do?”

“We must try and break the door in, I suppose. It’ll be a tough job,
though. Here, let one of the maids go down and wake Baily and tell him
to go for Dr. Wilkins at once. Now then, we’ll have a try at the door.
Half a moment, though, isn’t there a door into Miss Cynthia’s rooms?”

“Yes, sir, but that’s always bolted. It’s never been undone.”

“Well, we might just see.”

He ran rapidly down the corridor to Cynthia’s room. Mary Cavendish was
there, shaking the girl—who must have been an unusually sound
sleeper—and trying to wake her.

In a moment or two he was back.

“No good. That’s bolted too. We must break in the door. I think this
one is a shade less solid than the one in the passage.”

We strained and heaved together. The framework of the door was solid,
and for a long time it resisted our efforts, but at last we felt it
give beneath our weight, and finally, with a resounding crash, it was
burst open.

We stumbled in together, Lawrence still holding his candle. Mrs.
Inglethorp was lying on the bed, her whole form agitated by violent
convulsions, in one of which she must have overturned the table beside
her. As we entered, however, her limbs relaxed, and she fell back upon
the pillows.

John strode across the room, and lit the gas. Turning to Annie, one of
the housemaids, he sent her downstairs to the dining-room for brandy.
Then he went across to his mother whilst I unbolted the door that gave
on the corridor.

I turned to Lawrence, to suggest that I had better leave them now that
there was no further need of my services, but the words were frozen on
my lips. Never have I seen such a ghastly look on any man’s face. He
was white as chalk, the candle he held in his shaking hand was
sputtering onto the carpet, and his eyes, petrified with terror, or
some such kindred emotion, stared fixedly over my head at a point on
the further wall. It was as though he had seen something that turned
him to stone. I instinctively followed the direction of his eyes, but I
could see nothing unusual. The still feebly flickering ashes in the
grate, and the row of prim ornaments on the mantelpiece, were surely
harmless enough.

The violence of Mrs. Inglethorp’s attack seemed to be passing. She was
able to speak in short gasps.

“Better now—very sudden—stupid of me—to lock myself in.”

A shadow fell on the bed and, looking up, I saw Mary Cavendish standing
near the door with her arm around Cynthia. She seemed to be supporting
the girl, who looked utterly dazed and unlike herself. Her face was
heavily flushed, and she yawned repeatedly.

“Poor Cynthia is quite frightened,” said Mrs. Cavendish in a low clear
voice. She herself, I noticed, was dressed in her white land smock.
Then it must be later than I thought. I saw that a faint streak of
daylight was showing through the curtains of the windows, and that the
clock on the mantelpiece pointed to close upon five o’clock.

A strangled cry from the bed startled me. A fresh access of pain seized
the unfortunate old lady. The convulsions were of a violence terrible
to behold. Everything was confusion. We thronged round her, powerless
to help or alleviate. A final convulsion lifted her from the bed, until
she appeared to rest upon her head and her heels, with her body arched
in an extraordinary manner. In vain Mary and John tried to administer
more brandy. The moments flew. Again the body arched itself in that
peculiar fashion.

At that moment, Dr. Bauerstein pushed his way authoritatively into the
room. For one instant he stopped dead, staring at the figure on the
bed, and, at the same instant, Mrs. Inglethorp cried out in a strangled
voice, her eyes fixed on the doctor:

“Alfred—Alfred——” Then she fell back motionless on the pillows.

With a stride, the doctor reached the bed, and seizing her arms worked
them energetically, applying what I knew to be artificial respiration.
He issued a few short sharp orders to the servants. An imperious wave
of his hand drove us all to the door. We watched him, fascinated,
though I think we all knew in our hearts that it was too late, and that
nothing could be done now. I could see by the expression on his face
that he himself had little hope.

Finally he abandoned his task, shaking his head gravely. At that
moment, we heard footsteps outside, and Dr. Wilkins, Mrs. Inglethorp’s
own doctor, a portly, fussy little man, came bustling in.

In a few words Dr. Bauerstein explained how he had happened to be
passing the lodge gates as the car came out, and had run up to the
house as fast as he could, whilst the car went on to fetch Dr. Wilkins.
With a faint gesture of the hand, he indicated the figure on the bed.

“Ve—ry sad. Ve—ry sad,” murmured Dr. Wilkins. “Poor dear lady. Always
did far too much—far too much—against my advice. I warned her. Her
heart was far from strong. ‘Take it easy,’ I said to her,
‘Take—it—easy’. But no—her zeal for good works was too great. Nature
rebelled. Na—ture—re—belled.”

Dr. Bauerstein, I noticed, was watching the local doctor narrowly. He
still kept his eyes fixed on him as he spoke.

“The convulsions were of a peculiar violence, Dr. Wilkins. I am sorry
you were not here in time to witness them. They were quite—tetanic in
character.”

“Ah!” said Dr. Wilkins wisely.

“I should like to speak to you in private,” said Dr. Bauerstein. He
turned to John. “You do not object?”

“Certainly not.”

We all trooped out into the corridor, leaving the two doctors alone,
and I heard the key turned in the lock behind us.

We went slowly down the stairs. I was violently excited. I have a
certain talent for deduction, and Dr. Bauerstein’s manner had started a
flock of wild surmises in my mind. Mary Cavendish laid her hand upon my
arm.

“What is it? Why did Dr. Bauerstein seem so—peculiar?”

I looked at her.

“Do you know what I think?”

“What?”

“Listen!” I looked round, the others were out of earshot. I lowered my
voice to a whisper. “I believe she has been poisoned! I’m certain Dr.
Bauerstein suspects it.”

“_What?_” She shrank against the wall, the pupils of her eyes dilating
wildly. Then, with a sudden cry that startled me, she cried out: “No,
no—not that—not that!” And breaking from me, fled up the stairs. I
followed her, afraid that she was going to faint. I found her leaning
against the bannisters, deadly pale. She waved me away impatiently.

“No, no—leave me. I’d rather be alone. Let me just be quiet for a
minute or two. Go down to the others.”

I obeyed her reluctantly. John and Lawrence were in the dining-room. I
joined them. We were all silent, but I suppose I voiced the thoughts of
us all when I at last broke it by saying:

“Where is Mr. Inglethorp?”

John shook his head.

“He’s not in the house.”

Our eyes met. Where _was_ Alfred Inglethorp? His absence was strange
and inexplicable. I remembered Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words. What lay
beneath them? What more could she have told us, if she had had time?

At last we heard the doctors descending the stairs. Dr. Wilkins was
looking important and excited, and trying to conceal an inward
exultation under a manner of decorous calm. Dr. Bauerstein remained in
the background, his grave bearded face unchanged. Dr. Wilkins was the
spokesman for the two. He addressed himself to John:

“Mr. Cavendish, I should like your consent to a post-mortem.”

“Is that necessary?” asked John gravely. A spasm of pain crossed his
face.

“Absolutely,” said Dr. Bauerstein.

“You mean by that——?”

“That neither Dr. Wilkins nor myself could give a death certificate
under the circumstances.”

John bent his head.

“In that case, I have no alternative but to agree.”

“Thank you,” said Dr. Wilkins briskly. “We propose that it should take
place to-morrow night—or rather to-night.” And he glanced at the
daylight. “Under the circumstances, I am afraid an inquest can hardly
be avoided—these formalities are necessary, but I beg that you won’t
distress yourselves.”

There was a pause, and then Dr. Bauerstein drew two keys from his
pocket, and handed them to John.

“These are the keys of the two rooms. I have locked them and, in my
opinion, they would be better kept locked for the present.”

The doctors then departed.

I had been turning over an idea in my head, and I felt that the moment
had now come to broach it. Yet I was a little chary of doing so. John,
I knew, had a horror of any kind of publicity, and was an easygoing
optimist, who preferred never to meet trouble half-way. It might be
difficult to convince him of the soundness of my plan. Lawrence, on the
other hand, being less conventional, and having more imagination, I
felt I might count upon as an ally. There was no doubt that the moment
had come for me to take the lead.

“John,” I said, “I am going to ask you something.”

“Well?”

“You remember my speaking of my friend Poirot? The Belgian who is here?
He has been a most famous detective.”

“Yes.”

“I want you to let me call him in—to investigate this matter.”

“What—now? Before the post-mortem?”

“Yes, time is an advantage if—if—there has been foul play.”

“Rubbish!” cried Lawrence angrily. “In my opinion the whole thing is a
mare’s nest of Bauerstein’s! Wilkins hadn’t an idea of such a thing,
until Bauerstein put it into his head. But, like all specialists,
Bauerstein’s got a bee in his bonnet. Poisons are his hobby, so of
course he sees them everywhere.”

I confess that I was surprised by Lawrence’s attitude. He was so seldom
vehement about anything.

John hesitated.

“I can’t feel as you do, Lawrence,” he said at last. “I’m inclined to
give Hastings a free hand, though I should prefer to wait a bit. We
don’t want any unnecessary scandal.”

“No, no,” I cried eagerly, “you need have no fear of that. Poirot is
discretion itself.”

“Very well, then, have it your own way. I leave it in your hands.
Though, if it is as we suspect, it seems a clear enough case. God
forgive me if I am wronging him!”

I looked at my watch. It was six o’clock. I determined to lose no time.

Five minutes’ delay, however, I allowed myself. I spent it in
ransacking the library until I discovered a medical book which gave a
description of strychnine poisoning.






CHAPTER IV. POIROT INVESTIGATES

The house which the Belgians occupied in the village was quite close to
the park gates. One could save time by taking a narrow path through the
long grass, which cut off the detours of the winding drive. So I,
accordingly, went that way. I had nearly reached the lodge, when my
attention was arrested by the running figure of a man approaching me.
It was Mr. Inglethorp. Where had he been? How did he intend to explain
his absence?

He accosted me eagerly.

“My God! This is terrible! My poor wife! I have only just heard.”

“Where have you been?” I asked.

“Denby kept me late last night. It was one o’clock before we’d
finished. Then I found that I’d forgotten the latch-key after all. I
didn’t want to arouse the household, so Denby gave me a bed.”

“How did you hear the news?” I asked.

“Wilkins knocked Denby up to tell him. My poor Emily! She was so
self-sacrificing—such a noble character. She over-taxed her strength.”

A wave of revulsion swept over me. What a consummate hypocrite the man
was!

“I must hurry on,” I said, thankful that he did not ask me whither I
was bound.

In a few minutes I was knocking at the door of Leastways Cottage.

Getting no answer, I repeated my summons impatiently. A window above me
was cautiously opened, and Poirot himself looked out.

He gave an exclamation of surprise at seeing me. In a few brief words,
I explained the tragedy that had occurred, and that I wanted his help.

“Wait, my friend, I will let you in, and you shall recount to me the
affair whilst I dress.”

In a few moments he had unbarred the door, and I followed him up to his
room. There he installed me in a chair, and I related the whole story,
keeping back nothing, and omitting no circumstance, however
insignificant, whilst he himself made a careful and deliberate toilet.

I told him of my awakening, of Mrs. Inglethorp’s dying words, of her
husband’s absence, of the quarrel the day before, of the scrap of
conversation between Mary and her mother-in-law that I had overheard,
of the former quarrel between Mrs. Inglethorp and Evelyn Howard, and of
the latter’s innuendoes.

I was hardly as clear as I could wish. I repeated myself several times,
and occasionally had to go back to some detail that I had forgotten.
Poirot smiled kindly on me.

“The mind is confused? Is it not so? Take time, _mon ami_. You are
agitated; you are excited—it is but natural. Presently, when we are
calmer, we will arrange the facts, neatly, each in his proper place. We
will examine—and reject. Those of importance we will put on one side;
those of no importance, pouf!”—he screwed up his cherub-like face, and
puffed comically enough—“blow them away!”

“That’s all very well,” I objected, “but how are you going to decide
what is important, and what isn’t? That always seems the difficulty to
me.”

Poirot shook his head energetically. He was now arranging his moustache
with exquisite care.

“Not so. _Voyons!_ One fact leads to another—so we continue. Does the
next fit in with that? _A merveille!_ Good! We can proceed. This next
little fact—no! Ah, that is curious! There is something missing—a link
in the chain that is not there. We examine. We search. And that little
curious fact, that possibly paltry little detail that will not tally,
we put it here!” He made an extravagant gesture with his hand. “It is
significant! It is tremendous!”

“Y—es——”

“Ah!” Poirot shook his forefinger so fiercely at me that I quailed
before it. “Beware! Peril to the detective who says: ‘It is so small—it
does not matter. It will not agree. I will forget it.’ That way lies
confusion! Everything matters.”

“I know. You always told me that. That’s why I have gone into all the
details of this thing whether they seemed to me relevant or not.”

“And I am pleased with you. You have a good memory, and you have given
me the facts faithfully. Of the order in which you present them, I say
nothing—truly, it is deplorable! But I make allowances—you are upset.
To that I attribute the circumstance that you have omitted one fact of
paramount importance.”

“What is that?” I asked.

“You have not told me if Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night.”

I stared at him. Surely the war had affected the little man’s brain. He
was carefully engaged in brushing his coat before putting it on, and
seemed wholly engrossed in the task.

“I don’t remember,” I said. “And, anyway, I don’t see——”

“You do not see? But it is of the first importance.”

“I can’t see why,” I said, rather nettled. “As far as I can remember,
she didn’t eat much. She was obviously upset, and it had taken her
appetite away. That was only natural.”

“Yes,” said Poirot thoughtfully, “it was only natural.”

He opened a drawer, and took out a small despatch-case, then turned to
me.

“Now I am ready. We will proceed to the château, and study matters on
the spot. Excuse me, _mon ami_, you dressed in haste, and your tie is
on one side. Permit me.” With a deft gesture, he rearranged it.

“_Ça y est!_ Now, shall we start?”

We hurried up the village, and turned in at the lodge gates. Poirot
stopped for a moment, and gazed sorrowfully over the beautiful expanse
of park, still glittering with morning dew.

“So beautiful, so beautiful, and yet, the poor family, plunged in
sorrow, prostrated with grief.”

He looked at me keenly as he spoke, and I was aware that I reddened
under his prolonged gaze.

Was the family prostrated by grief? Was the sorrow at Mrs. Inglethorp’s
death so great? I realized that there was an emotional lack in the
atmosphere. The dead woman had not the gift of commanding love. Her
death was a shock and a distress, but she would not be passionately
regretted.

Poirot seemed to follow my thoughts. He nodded his head gravely.

“No, you are right,” he said, “it is not as though there was a blood
tie. She has been kind and generous to these Cavendishes, but she was
not their own mother. Blood tells—always remember that—blood tells.”

“Poirot,” I said, “I wish you would tell me why you wanted to know if
Mrs. Inglethorp ate well last night? I have been turning it over in my
mind, but I can’t see how it has anything to do with the matter?”

He was silent for a minute or two as we walked along, but finally he
said:

“I do not mind telling you—though, as you know, it is not my habit to
explain until the end is reached. The present contention is that Mrs.
Inglethorp died of strychnine poisoning, presumably administered in her
coffee.”

“Yes?”

“Well, what time was the coffee served?”

“About eight o’clock.”

“Therefore she drank it between then and half-past eight—certainly not
much later. Well, strychnine is a fairly rapid poison. Its effects
would be felt very soon, probably in about an hour. Yet, in Mrs.
Inglethorp’s case, the symptoms do not manifest themselves until five
o’clock the next morning: nine hours! But a heavy meal, taken at about
the same time as the poison, might retard its effects, though hardly to
that extent. Still, it is a possibility to be taken into account. But,
according to you, she ate very little for supper, and yet the symptoms
do not develop until early the next morning! Now that is a curious
circumstance, my friend. Something may arise at the autopsy to explain
it. In the meantime, remember it.”

As we neared the house, John came out and met us. His face looked weary
and haggard.

“This is a very dreadful business, Monsieur Poirot,” he said. “Hastings
has explained to you that we are anxious for no publicity?”

“I comprehend perfectly.”

“You see, it is only suspicion so far. We have nothing to go upon.”

“Precisely. It is a matter of precaution only.”

John turned to me, taking out his cigarette-case, and lighting a
cigarette as he did so.

“You know that fellow Inglethorp is back?”

“Yes. I met him.”

John flung the match into an adjacent flower bed, a proceeding which
was too much for Poirot’s feelings. He retrieved it, and buried it
neatly.

“It’s jolly difficult to know how to treat him.”

“That difficulty will not exist long,” pronounced Poirot quietly.

John looked puzzled, not quite understanding the portent of this
cryptic saying. He handed the two keys which Dr. Bauerstein had given
him to me.

“Show Monsieur Poirot everything he wants to see.”

“The rooms are locked?” asked Poirot.

“Dr. Bauerstein considered it advisable.”

Poirot nodded thoughtfully.

“Then he is very sure. Well, that simplifies matters for us.”

We went up together to the room of the tragedy. For convenience I
append a plan of the room and the principal articles of furniture in
it.




       02



Poirot locked the door on the inside, and proceeded to a minute
inspection of the room. He darted from one object to the other with the
agility of a grasshopper. I remained by the door, fearing to obliterate
any clues. Poirot, however, did not seem grateful to me for my
forbearance.

“What have you, my friend,” he cried, “that you remain there like—how
do you say it?—ah, yes, the stuck pig?”

I explained that I was afraid of obliterating any foot-marks.

“Foot-marks? But what an idea! There has already been practically an
army in the room! What foot-marks are we likely to find? No, come here
and aid me in my search. I will put down my little case until I need
it.”

He did so, on the round table by the window, but it was an ill-advised
proceeding; for, the top of it being loose, it tilted up, and
precipitated the despatch-case on the floor.

“_Eh voilà une table!_” cried Poirot. “Ah, my friend, one may live in a
big house and yet have no comfort.”

After which piece of moralizing, he resumed his search.

A small purple despatch-case, with a key in the lock, on the
writing-table, engaged his attention for some time. He took out the key
from the lock, and passed it to me to inspect. I saw nothing peculiar,
however. It was an ordinary key of the Yale type, with a bit of twisted
wire through the handle.

Next, he examined the framework of the door we had broken in, assuring
himself that the bolt had really been shot. Then he went to the door
opposite leading into Cynthia’s room. That door was also bolted, as I
had stated. However, he went to the length of unbolting it, and opening
and shutting it several times; this he did with the utmost precaution
against making any noise. Suddenly something in the bolt itself seemed
to rivet his attention. He examined it carefully, and then, nimbly
whipping out a pair of small forceps from his case, he drew out some
minute particle which he carefully sealed up in a tiny envelope.

On the chest of drawers there was a tray with a spirit lamp and a small
saucepan on it. A small quantity of a dark fluid remained in the
saucepan, and an empty cup and saucer that had been drunk out of stood
near it.

I wondered how I could have been so unobservant as to overlook this.
Here was a clue worth having. Poirot delicately dipped his finger into
liquid, and tasted it gingerly. He made a grimace.

“Cocoa—with—I think—rum in it.”

He passed on to the debris on the floor, where the table by the bed had
been overturned. A reading-lamp, some books, matches, a bunch of keys,
and the crushed fragments of a coffee-cup lay scattered about.

“Ah, this is curious,” said Poirot.

“I must confess that I see nothing particularly curious about it.”

“You do not? Observe the lamp—the chimney is broken in two places; they
lie there as they fell. But see, the coffee-cup is absolutely smashed
to powder.”

“Well,” I said wearily, “I suppose someone must have stepped on it.”

“Exactly,” said Poirot, in an odd voice. “Someone stepped on it.”

He rose from his knees, and walked slowly across to the mantelpiece,
where he stood abstractedly fingering the ornaments, and straightening
them—a trick of his when he was agitated.

“_Mon ami_,” he said, turning to me, “somebody stepped on that cup,
grinding it to powder, and the reason they did so was either because it
contained strychnine or—which is far more serious—because it did not
contain strychnine!”

I made no reply. I was bewildered, but I knew that it was no good
asking him to explain. In a moment or two he roused himself, and went
on with his investigations. He picked up the bunch of keys from the
floor, and twirling them round in his fingers finally selected one,
very bright and shining, which he tried in the lock of the purple
despatch-case. It fitted, and he opened the box, but after a moment’s
hesitation, closed and relocked it, and slipped the bunch of keys, as
well as the key that had originally stood in the lock, into his own
pocket.

“I have no authority to go through these papers. But it should be
done—at once!”

He then made a very careful examination of the drawers of the
wash-stand. Crossing the room to the left-hand window, a round stain,
hardly visible on the dark brown carpet, seemed to interest him
particularly. He went down on his knees, examining it minutely—even
going so far as to smell it.

Finally, he poured a few drops of the cocoa into a test tube, sealing
it up carefully. His next proceeding was to take out a little notebook.

“We have found in this room,” he said, writing busily, “six points of
interest. Shall I enumerate them, or will you?”

“Oh, you,” I replied hastily.

“Very well, then. One, a coffee-cup that has been ground into powder;
two, a despatch-case with a key in the lock; three, a stain on the
floor.”

“That may have been done some time ago,” I interrupted.

“No, for it is still perceptibly damp and smells of coffee. Four, a
fragment of some dark green fabric—only a thread or two, but
recognizable.”

“Ah!” I cried. “That was what you sealed up in the envelope.”

“Yes. It may turn out to be a piece of one of Mrs. Inglethorp’s own
dresses, and quite unimportant. We shall see. Five, _this_!” With a
dramatic gesture, he pointed to a large splash of candle grease on the
floor by the writing-table. “It must have been done since yesterday,
otherwise a good housemaid would have at once removed it with
blotting-paper and a hot iron. One of my best hats once—but that is not
to the point.”

“It was very likely done last night. We were very agitated. Or perhaps
Mrs. Inglethorp herself dropped her candle.”

“You brought only one candle into the room?”

“Yes. Lawrence Cavendish was carrying it. But he was very upset. He
seemed to see something over here”—I indicated the mantelpiece—“that
absolutely paralysed him.”

“That is interesting,” said Poirot quickly. “Yes, it is suggestive”—his
eye sweeping the whole length of the wall—“but it was not his candle
that made this great patch, for you perceive that this is white grease;
whereas Monsieur Lawrence’s candle, which is still on the
dressing-table, is pink. On the other hand, Mrs. Inglethorp had no
candlestick in the room, only a reading-lamp.”

“Then,” I said, “what do you deduce?”

To which my friend only made a rather irritating reply, urging me to
use my own natural faculties.

“And the sixth point?” I asked. “I suppose it is the sample of cocoa.”

“No,” said Poirot thoughtfully. “I might have included that in the six,
but I did not. No, the sixth point I will keep to myself for the
present.”

words,

